
=== PAGE 1 ===
REPUBLIC OF CAMEROON     PEACE-WORK-FATHERLAND               --------------              -------------                    FINANCE BILL OF THE REPUBLIC OF CAMEROON FOR  THE 2025 FINANCIAL YEAR  

=== PAGE 2 ===
 2 
PART ONE GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR BUDGETARY AND FINANCIAL BALANCE  CHAPTER ONE GENERAL PROVISIONS  SECTION ONE: The purpose of this law is to determine Government revenue and expenditure, lay down the conditions of budgetary and financial balance and establish the State budget for 2025.  SECTION TWO: State revenue and expenditure shall include budgetary revenue and expenditure as well as cash and financing resources and expenses.  1. The State budget shall determine the nature, amount and allocation of revenue and expenditure, the resulting budgetary balance as well as the terms of financing. 2. The State budget shall comprise the general budget and Special Appropriations Accounts.  SECTION THREE: This part provides for and authorizes State resources, fixes the ceilings for State expenses and establishes the resulting budgetary and financial balance.  PART TWO PROVISIONS RELATING TO RESOURCES  SECTION FOUR: The taxes, duties, levies, contributions, royalties, other proceeds and public revenue of the Republic of Cameroon shall continue to be collected in accordance with the instruments in force, subject to the provisions of this law.  CHAPTER ONE PROVISIONS ON CUSTOMS LEGISLATION  SECTION FIVE: Support to the livestock sector   1 “Animal feed supplements”, in particular vitamins, essential amino acids and mineral salts not produced locally, intended for use in feed preparations to enhance animal growth, shall benefit from a 50% reduction on the taxable import value. 2 The "animal feed supplements" list referred to above shall be established by a separate instrument issued by the Minister in charge of finance after consultation with the Ministry in charge of livestock and livestock farmers' guilds, where applicable.  SECTION SIX: Support to green energy promotion  Electrically powered vehicles and motorbikes, under tariff subheadings 8701.24 00 100, 8702.40 10 100, 8702.40.20.100, 8703.80 10 100, 8703.80.90.100, 8704.60 00 100, 8709.11 00 000 and 8711.60 00 000, imported as new, their batteries and recharging stations, shall benefit from a 50% reduction in the taxable value, for twenty-four months.  

=== PAGE 3 ===
 3 
SECTION SEVEN: Customs clearance of imported software   Pursuant to the provisions of Section 2(6) (b) and (c) of the Finance Law for the 2018 financial year, software imported into Cameroon on a medium or by downloading, under sub-headings 8523.80 00 100 and 8523.80.00.200, shall be classified in the second category of the Common External Tariff (CET) at the rate of 10% when declared spontaneously. They shall remain subject to the third category of the CET at the rate of 20% when their importation into Cameroon is established subsequently during customs inspections.  SECTION EIGHT: Imported goods with similar local products excluded from customs import facilities   Imported goods with locally produced counterparts shall be excluded from customs facilities, except imports resulting from the implementation of preferential trade agreements in force in Cameroon or in situations where there is a shortfall in national production, duly certified by the minister in charge of trade.  SECTION NINE: Assessment of imported construction machinery and equipment   1 Civil engineering machinery and equipment used in public works, when new, shall be cleared through customs based on the transaction value. 2 Imported second-hand machinery and equipment referred to in paragraph 1 above that is less than 20 years old shall cleared through customs based on its market value as indicated by the Customs Authorities, subject to adjustment according to the number of hours of use shown on the odometer. 3 Imported second-hand machinery and equipment over 20 years old shall be cleared based on the residual values defined by the Customs Authorities, according to age and the number of hours of use shown on the odometer.  SECTION TEN: Export taxes on some goods   1 To amend the provisions of Section 10 paragraph 1(c) of the Finance Law for the 2023 financial year relating to the rate of export duty applicable to the export of processed and semi-manufactured wood, the rate of export duty applicable to processed wood of tariff head 4409, from the third stage of processing and classified at an intermediate level between finished and cut wood products, shall be 5% of the FOB value of the species, subject to the production of a certificate issued by the competent technical ministry attesting to their category. 2 Cocoa, rubber and timber shall benefit from a 20% discount on the FOB (Free on Board) export value, when they are covered by a certificate issued by the relevant technical ministry, attesting to compliance with anti-deforestation standards.      

=== PAGE 4 ===
 4 
SECTION ELEVEN: Lifting and discharge of import and/or export declarations   1. Prior to any import or export of goods with a FOB value of more than CFAF 1 000 000, economic operators shall, in accordance with the provisions of articles 53 and 62 of Regulation No. 02/18/CEMAC/UMAC/CM of 21 December 2018 on foreign exchange regulations in the CEMAC, to lodge an import or export declaration via the foreign trade one-stop shop, through an approved customs agent. 2. Any import or export with a FOB value over CFAF 1 000 000 not covered by an import or export declaration is liable to a fine equal to 50% of the taxable value of the goods concerned, except imports covered by the duty and tax-free customs regime, in accordance with the legislation in force. 3. The import or export declarations referred to in paragraph 1 above must then be domiciled with an approved intermediary responsible for the transfer of funds relating to the goods concerned, provided that they have a FOB (free-on-board) value of CFAF 5 000 000, in accordance with the provisions of Regulation No. 02/18/CEMAC/UMAC/CM of 21 December 2018 on foreign exchange regulations in the CEMAC.  Failure to affect the domiciliation of the said transactions is punishable by a fine of 10% of the amount of the transaction in accordance with the provisions of Articles 159 and 160 of the said Regulation. 4. Importers, exporters and their agents who have raised import or export declarations shall clear these declarations before the expiry date set at 6 (six) months, by actually importing or exporting the goods concerned. Where commercial circumstances or circumstances beyond the control of the importer or exporter so require, the import or export declaration may be exceptionally extended by the Minister in charge of finance for an additional non-renewable period of 3 (three) months, except for machinery and other capital goods requiring longer import times due to production constraints after the order has been placed, which may be extended for a period not exceeding six months. 5. Approved intermediaries shall notify the Customs Authorities electronically each month, no later than the 5th of each month, of all foreign trade transactions recorded in their books for the purpose of importing goods that have not been discharged within the prescribed time limits. Failure to transmit the above non-discharged operations shall be tantamount to a refusal to communicate documents and shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Article 465 of the CEMAC Customs Code, without prejudice to the other penalties provided for in the event of complicity or interest in established fraud. 6. Prior to any transfer of funds to a foreign country in a single transaction for an amount exceeding CFAF 100 000 000, the approved intermediary acting as paying agent for an import shall conduct a thorough check on the real existence, effective domiciliation, authenticity of the documentation produced and the financial capacity of the customer placing the order, in connection with the requirements relating to beneficial owners and in particular for companies less than three years old, on pain of incurring liability as an accomplice or party to the fraud.  

=== PAGE 5 ===
 5 
7. Persons who transfer funds totalling CFAF 100 000 000 abroad based on import declarations for related goods and services, without any effective counterpart in terms of imports of related goods and services, shall be liable to a prison sentence of between 1 and 12 months, with suspension or prohibition on opening new import declarations, without prejudice to the other penalties provided for by the regulations in force. In such cases, the Customs Authorities shall determine and recover the fine and place the offender concerned at the disposal of the competent court for the prosecution of any offence, where applicable. However, the aforementioned persons shall be exempt from the penalty if they can provide proof, to the satisfaction of the Customs Authorities, that the funds initially transferred to cover the planned import operation were repatriated after the operation was cancelled.  SECTION TWELVE: Penalizing border transactions masking money laundering and terrorist financing  1. As part of its duties under the provisions of Article 65 of the CEMAC Customs Code, the Customs Authorities is authorized to use appropriate means and measures to combat money laundering at borders, in particular the use of dogs and other detection and X-ray devices. 2. During controls, customs officers shall seize cash and monetary instruments held by travellers in breach of the legislation in force, as well as any property identified and established as being used to launder the proceeds of crime or intended to finance acts of terrorism and to have it confiscated by the competent court. 3. Intermediaries approved under the beneficial owner and prudence requirements, as well as those involved in the logistics and customs clearance chain who are aware that customs operations are being used for money laundering and/or terrorist financing purposes, shall inform the Customs Authorities through a confidential alert, failing which they may subsequently be held liable as an accomplice or party to the fraud.   SECTION THIRTEEN: Penalties for providing false or erroneous information to the Customs Authorities  1. When exercising the special right of communication provided for in Article 105 of the CEMAC Customs Code, the persons requested are required to provide the Customs Authorities with the precise, accurate and exhaustive information requested, in accordance with the prescribed forms and deadlines. 2. The communication of inaccurate or incomplete information, even though held by the persons requested by the Customs Authorities in the context of the exercise of the special right of communication, shall be treated as an act of complicity or interest in fraud and punished in accordance with the provisions of Articles 452 and 453 of the CEMAC Customs Code, without prejudice to the other penalties provided for by the regulations in force.   

=== PAGE 6 ===
 6 
CHAPTER TWO PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE GENERAL TAX CODE  SECTION FOURTEEN: The General Tax Code provisions of sections 7, 8 a, 8 b, 17 b, 21, 36, 46, 56, 69, 70, 74 a, 85, 87, 92 a, 93, 93 d, 115, 116, 128, 131 a, 142, 149, 149 e (new), 227, 228 b, 228 e, 242, 247, 247 a, 543, 544, 546 b, 546 e, 549, 554, 579, 606, M 2, M 2 quarter, M 3 a, M 6 b, M 7, M 7 d, M 19 a, M 20 a, M 40, M 41 a, M 71, M 76, M 78, M 79, M 86, M 86 b, M 104, M 104 a, and M 116, are amended and/or supplemented as follows:   BOOK ONE TAXES AND DUTIES  PART I  DIRECT TAXES  CHAPTER I  COMPANY TAX  DIVISION III  TAXABLE PROFITS  Section 7: Net taxable profit shall be established after deduction of all charges directly entailed by the exercise of activities subject to assessment in Cameroon, in particular:   A – Overhead expenses  1- Sundry remunerations and provision of services  (a) ……………………………………. ; (b) ……………………………………. ; (c) ……………………………………. ; (d) Subject to international agreements, the following shall be regarded as expenses on condition that they are not exaggerated:   • Head office overheads for operations carried put in Cameroon and the remuneration of certain effective services (studies; technical, financial or accounting assistance) provided to Cameroonian firms by foreign or Cameroonian natural persons or corporate bodies. On no account shall there be accepted on this basis any sum exceeding 2.5% of the taxable profit before deducting the expenses concerned.  In the event of a deficit, this provision applies to the results of the last financial year for which the statute of limitations has not expired. However, for companies in a continuous deficit situation and new companies in a deficit situation, the limitation applies to turnover at the rate of 1%. If there is no turnover, the basis for calculating the cap is the total amount of annual expenses incurred by the company.   

=== PAGE 7 ===
 7 
The ceiling stipulated above shall be fixed at 1% of the turnover for the firms specialized in public works and 5% of the turnover for design firms operating in accordance with the regulations relating to design firms and consulting engineers.   However, remuneration paid outside the Central African Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC) for accounting and tax services shall be excluded from the deduction. • Commission or brokerage on goods purchased by enterprises situated in Cameroon, shall be to the benefit of these enterprises within the limit of 1% of the purchase price. This commission should be billed and the receipt attached to that of the suppliers. • …………………………………………………………………………………… ; Nevertheless, when these amounts are profitable to a firm located outside the Central Africa Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC) and participating in the management of a Cameroonian firm in which it hold shares, they shall be considered as sums accrued from the distribution of profits.  When their partners on the payroll of the firm are on leave, companies shall be authorized to deduct from their profits, on condition that the journey was made, the transport expenses to and from the said partners, their spouses or spouse and dependent children.  Under no circumstances shall such expenses give rise to a depreciation allowance account.   2- Rental Expenditure   The amount for rentals granted to a company shall be regarded as part of the expenses on condition that it is not exaggerated in comparison with the rentals usually paid for similar property or facilities.   Nevertheless, when a partner, natural persons or corporate body, has at least 10% of the holdings or shares of a company, the proceeds from the rentals other than those from the property granted to such company shall not be considered as expenses of the firm.   For the implementation of this provision, the holdings or shares held as property or as usufruct by the spouse, relatives in the ascending or descending line of the partner, shall be deemed to belong to the partner. The rest shall remain unchanged.  B - Financial Costs Unchanged.  C - Actual losses The following shall be deductible from profits:  - …………………………………………………………………………………………… ;  

=== PAGE 8 ===
 8 
- losses due to bad debts for which all ways and means of amicable or forced recovery provided for by the OHADA Uniform Act Organizing Simplified Recovery Procedures and Enforcement Measures have been exhausted;  However, losses due to bad debts of an amount less than CFAF 500 000 which has been provisioned over a minimum period of five (5) years shall be deducted. This amount shall increase to CFAF 3 000 000 for credit institutions.  The rest shall remain unchanged   E - Provisions Provisions constituted to meet clearly specified losses or charges rendered probable by the course of events, provided that they are actually shown in the annual accounts. …………………………………………………………………………………………………..………………………………………………………… …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………. ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….. Provisions for doubtful debts and commitments of credit and microfinance institutions shall not be deductible where the said provisions relate to cumulative annual credits of at least CFAF 50 million granted to the same company on the basis of financial statements not certified by an auditor, in accordance with the provisions of Section M.6b of this Code.    Section 8 a: (1) ………………………………………………………………………….  ……………………………………………. (2) The following taxes shall also be non-deductible  - expenses supported by invoices not bearing the mandatory indications provided for in Article 150(3) of this Code, to the exclusion of invoices from foreign suppliers; - expenses justified by invoices issued outside the tax authorities' electronic invoicing monitoring system; - ………………………………………………….. ; - ………………………………………………….. .  Section 8 b (new): (1) The cost and remunerations of all types, including disbursements, posted in the accounts records by a natural persons or legal entity resident or established in Cameroon and linked to transactions with natural persons or legal entities resident or established in a territory or state considered to be a tax haven, shall not be deductible in determining the company tax or income tax of individuals in Cameroon.  The rest shall remain unchanged.     

=== PAGE 9 ===
 9 
DIVISION VI TAX CALCULATION  Section 17 b: (1) Tax adjustments made when auditing companies benefiting from reduced tax rates under special or exceptional tax arrangements shall be subject to the standard company tax rates, as defined in Sections 17 and 17a above, in the event of fraud as referred to in Sections M 107 et seq of the Manual of Tax Procedures, or improper use of the tax facilities granted under these arrangements.                         (2) Fraud or failure to comply with the obligations laid down by the special or exceptional tax arrangements in question must be recorded in a report prepared and signed by both parties. Any refusal to sign must be mentioned in the report.  DIVISION IX TAX PAYMENT  Section 21: (1) The company tax shall be paid on the initiative of the taxpayer not later than the 15th of the following month, in accordance with the terms below:   a. ……………………………………………………………….. ; b. ……………………………………………………………….. ; c. ……………………………………………………………….. ; d. For persons subject to the simplified system, one instalment representing 5% of turnover realized during each month, and paid not later than the 15th day of the following month. Such instalment shall be increased by 10% for additional council tax. However, the above advance payment shall be 14% of the gross margin, increased by 10% as levy for additional council tax for companies in the product distribution sector with an administered margin as referred to in paragraph (c) of this subparagraph.  The rest shall remain unchanged.                     (2) The instalment referred to in section 21 (1) above shall be deducted at source by the public accountants and persons of equivalent status during the settlement of bills paid by the budget of the State, regional and local authorities, public establishments, public or semi-public corporations and some non-profit organizations as well as private sector enterprises, the list of which shall be established by regulation.  The rest shall remain unchanged.         

=== PAGE 10 ===
 10 
CHAPTER II PERSONAL INCOME TAX  DIVISION II BASIS OF ASSESSMENT OF THE PERSONAL INCOME TAX  SUBDIVISION II INCOME FROM STOCKS AND SHARES  I - TAXABLE INCOME  A. Proceeds from stocks and shares income considered as such    Section 36: All profits not ploughed back into the company shall be considered as distributed income. They include notably:   1) ……………………………………………………………; 2) ……………………………………………………………; 3) ……………………………………………………………; 4) Expenses of CFAF 100 000 (one hundred thousand) or more when paid in cash, irrespective of the financial year in which they were incurred.  SUBDIVISION III  INCOME FROM PROPERTY  I- TAXABLE INCOME  Section 46: The following shall be included in the category of income from property where they are not included in the profits of an industrial, commercial or handicraft concern, agricultural undertaking or a non-commercial profession:  1. Income from the renting out of built-on or non-built-on property situated in Cameroon; 2. Capital gains realized from built-on or non-build-on property acquired against payment or free of charge; 3. Interest earned by shareholders of a realty partnership that did not opt for company tax. SUBDIVISION VI  NON-COMMERCIAL PROFITS  I - TAXABLE INCOME   Section 56: (1) Earnings from liberal professions, public offices and trusts held by persons without commercial status, from non-salaried income of sportsmen and artists, and from all operations, gainful activities and sources of gain unconnected with any other category of profit or income shall be deemed to be non-commercial earnings or earnings considered as such.   

=== PAGE 11 ===
 11 
(2) Profits shall notably comprise:  (a) income from stock-exchange operations performed by individuals;  (b) ......................................... ; (g) ............................................. ; (h) remuneration for services of any kind paid to individuals under the non-professional taxpayer regime.  DIVISION III  TAX CALCULATION  Section 69: (1) Subject to international conventions, personal income tax applied to salaries shall be calculated by applying the following scale on net wages, salaries, pensions and annuities:   - ....................................... ; - ....................................... ; - ....................................... ; - ....................................... ; (2)……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  (3) In the specific case of income and non-commercial profits referred to in Section 56(2) d, e, f and h of this Code, tax shall be calculated by applying a 10% flat rate to taxable income. This rate shall be reduced to 5% for the income referred to in Section 56(2) g.  Section 70: (1) In the specific case of income on stocks and shares, a 15% flat rate shall be applicable to taxable income.  The rate shall be increased to 30% for income on stocks and shares, in general, any passive income, including income from property, paid to a natural or legal person resident or established on a territory or a State considered as tax paradise within the meaning of Section 8c of this Code.                      (2) Notwithstanding the provisions of the first paragraph of this Section, this rate shall be 10% for dividends regularly distributed by companies whose turnover is less than or equal to CFAF 3 (three) billion.   DIVISION V OBLIGATION TO FILE RETURNS  Section 74 a: (1) Non-professional taxpayers who receive income from salaries, wages, pensions, life annuities and/or income from transferable securities and income from property, and in general any passive income, shall file a recapitulative annual income tax return with the tax centre of their place of residence, within the following deadlines:   - by 31 July each year latest for dignitaries, the list of whom shall be set out in a separate instrument issued by the Minister in charge of finance, and employees in the public and semi-public sector; 

=== PAGE 12 ===
 12 
- by 30 September each year latest, for employees of private-sector taxpayers covered by the Large Enterprises Department, the Medium-sized Enterprises Tax Centres and the Specialized Tax Centres; - by 31 October each year latest for other individuals. (2) ……………………………………………. ; (3) ……………………………………………. ; (4) ……………………………………………. ; (5) Any person who pays the income referred to in paragraph 1 of this section shall provide the beneficiaries, by 15 March of each year latest, with a detailed summary statement showing all the earnings and remuneration paid during the previous calendar year, together with details of the deductions made at source on such amounts. Failure to comply with this obligation shall expose the paying party to the penalties provided for in Section M 104 of the Manual of Tax Procedures, applicable per summary statement referred to above.  DIVISION VI METHODS OF COLLECTION  SUBDIVISION II INCOME FROM SECURITIES  Section 85: (1) Personal income tax levied on capital gains from securities calculated in accordance with Section 69 of this Code shall be deducted at source by the person paying the proceeds mentioned in Sections 35 et seq of this Code. The deduction thus made gives rise to the issue of a certificate of deduction at source which must be generated from the tax authority's computer system. It is paid to the tax collection office of the place of location of the head office of the person who filed the return 15 days after the beginning of payments for such products.   Whatever the case and pursuant to Section 146 of the OHADA uniform Act relating to commercial enterprises and EIG, dividends paid out by the General Assembly shall be deemed as distributed to the beneficiaries after a lapse of 9 (nine) months following the close of the financial year, unless an extension is granted by the president of the court having jurisdiction. The same shall apply to profits deemed to have been distributed by companies with neither domicile nor registered office in Cameroon, in accordance with the provisions of Section 36 (3) of this Code.  The rest shall remain unchanged.         

=== PAGE 13 ===
 13 
SUBDIVISION III  REAL ESTATE INCOME  Section 87: A 15% deduction at source shall be levied on gross real estate income calculated in compliance with the provisions of section 48 of this Code.  The withholding tax is levied exclusively by public administrations and establishments, legal entities and sole proprietorships subject to the actual system of assessment, the simplified tax regime or the regime for non-profit-making organizations (NPOs) included on a list established by regulation. Rents paid to enterprises assessed on the basis of actual earnings and depending solely on the specialized management units shall be exempt from the deduction.  SUBDIVISION IV HANDICRAFT, INDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL, AGRICULTURAL AND NON-COMMERCIAL PROFITS  Section 92 a: A 5% installment shall be deducted at source by the State, regional and local authorities, administrative public establishments, public or semi-public companies, private enterprises and some non-profit organizations (NPOs) the list of which shall be established by regulation, on the fees, commissions and emoluments paid to members of liberal professions, irrespective of their legal form or tax system.  The rest shall remain unchanged.   Section 93: Tax owed by road transport operators shall be paid within 15 days following the end of each quarter using a card bearing the full name and address of the taxpayer .................................................... deleted.   CHAPTER III GENERAL AND COMMON PROVISIONS ON COMPANY AND PERSONAL INCOME TAX  DIVISION I ASSESSMENT REGIMES Section 93 c: (1) ………………………………………………………………………. ……………………..                         (2)……………………………………………………………………… ………………………………………………..                        (3) The following shall be subject to the real regime:  a. sole proprietorships and legal persons with an annual turnover, exclusive of tax of CFAF 50 million and above shall be liable to the actual earnings taxation system; b. regardless of their turnover:  i. …………………………………………………… ;  ii. …………………………………………………… ;  iii. …………………………………………………… ;   

=== PAGE 14 ===
 14 
iv. By express derogation granted by the Director-General of Taxation, new taxpayers providing evidence of an investment programme duly validated by the tax authorities, or of an order for an amount in excess of CFAF 100 000 000 (one hundred million).  DIVISION V  TAX INCENTIVES C- PUBLIC CONTRACTS TAX REGIME  II- TAX REGIME OF PUBLIC CONTRACTS FUNDED WITH EXTERNAL OR JOINT RESOURCES  Section 115 (new): (1) Public contracts with external or joint financing shall be evaluated and concluded inclusive of all taxes.                          (2) Duties and taxes on contracts with external or joint financing shall be borne by the successful bidder, with the exception of value added tax (VAT), which shall be borne by the project owner.                           (3) However, where the financing agreement for a public contract with external or joint financing does not provide for VAT to be paid, it shall be paid from the counterpart funds provided for in the project owner's budget.                            (4) The successful bidder shall pay VAT on all intermediate goods and services necessary for the completion of the project.                            (5) VAT paid by the successful bidder for contracts with external or joint financing shall be recoverable, either by deduction, offsetting or refund, in accordance with the procedures defined by a separate instrument issued by the Minister in charge of finance.  Section 116 (new): (1) The tax regime defined in section 115 new above shall apply to all financing agreements entered into as from 1 January 2025.                                (2) Ongoing projects shall continue, where appropriate, to be subject to payment of the value added tax on the basis of the provisions in force at the time of conclusion of their financing agreement.                               (3) The liability amount shall not exceed that of the official VAT rate applied to the contract amount.            

=== PAGE 15 ===
 15 
 PART II  VALUE-ADDED TAX AND EXCISE DUTY  CHAPTER I SCOPE OF APPLICATION  DIVISION III EXEMPTIONS  Section 128: The following shall be exempted from VAT:   (a) ……………………………………………………………………………  6) a- essential goods listed under Annex 1, notably: The rest shall remain unchanged. DIVISION V EXCISE DUTY  Section 131 a: (1) The following shall not be subject to excise duty:  - Inputs of products subject to excise duty shall not be subject to excise duty, provided that they are purchased by local production enterprises subject to excise duty; - electrically powered vehicles and motorbikes, under tariff subheadings 8701.24 00 100, 8702.40 10 100, 8702.40.20.100, 8703.80 10 100, 8703.80.90.100, 8704.60 00 100, 8709.11 00 000 and 8711.60 00 000.  The rest shall remain unchanged.  CHAPTER II  METHODS OF CALCULATION  DIVISION III  LIQUIDATION  B - RATE   Section 142: (1) VAT and excise duty rates shall be fixed as follows: Unchanged.  (6) (a) The abated rate of excise duty shall apply to: Unchanged.  (b) The reduced excise duty rate shall apply to: - .................................................................. ; - imported ballpoint pens of tariff heading 9608. 10 00 000 and 9608.30 00 000  The rest shall remain unchanged. 

=== PAGE 16 ===
 16 
CHAPTER III  METHODS OF TAX COLLECTION AND RETURNS  DIVISION I  COLLECTION  Section 149: (1)………………………………………………………………………………                        (2) For State, regional and local authority and public administrative establishment semi-public and public companies’ suppliers, as well as some non-profit organizations (NPOs) and private sector companies, the lists of which shall be established by regulation, Value Added Tax shall be deducted at source when invoices are paid and paid to the tax authorities or, failing that, to the local accounting office, under the same conditions and within the same timeframe as for other transactions. Such deductions shall apply to both initial invoices and credit invoices relating to trade discounts. The deduction thus made shall be subject to the issue of a certificate of deduction at source, which must be generated from the tax authorities' computer system.  The rest shall remain unchanged.  Section 149 d (new): (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of this Code, Value Added Tax (VAT) applicable to port operations shall be automatically paid and refunded as follows: !a. VAT on consignees’ and shipping agents’ agency fees and port charges invoiced by intermediaries shall be paid by the port authorities via their IT system at the time of payment of the corresponding invoices, and remitted to the tax centre to which they are attached. b. VAT applicable to the fees of Authorized Customs Agents, as well as to the costs of stevedoring, handling, scanning, inspection and control, shall be liquidated and repaid via the Customs Authority's computer system when the customs return is validated. !                 (2) The tax authorities, in conjunction with the government services and entities concerned, shall ensure that the VAT paid is paid in accordance with the procedures set out and in compliance with the provisions of the law. !                 (3) The terms of application of this provision are specified in a text issued by the Minister of Finance. ! ANNEXES TO PART II  ANNEX I: LIST OF ESSENTIAL GOODS EXEMPTED FROM VAT  Tariff   Description 010511 00 000 Live cocks and hens, domestic species, not exceeding 185 g    …… … … ………. 

=== PAGE 17 ===
 17 
 ANNEX II: LIST OF PRODUCTS SUBJECT TO EXCISE DUTIES 
  PART IV  SUNDRY TAXES AND DUTIES  CHAPTER III  SPECIAL INCOME TAX  Section 227: The basis of assessment shall be the gross amount of the levies and remuneration referred to above. Gross amount shall mean various kinds of remuneration including the special income tax.  Where the acquisition of an asset involves the direct or indirect intervention of the supplier for its installation, commissioning or any other service necessary for its operation, the purchaser shall produce all supporting documentation, in particular the contract, purchase invoices and technical documentation, making it possible to distinguish the price of the asset from that of the related services.  In the absence of this clarification, the price of the services shall be deemed to correspond to 25% of the value of the property, and the related SIT shall be calculated on this basis.            
1102.20 00 000 Locally produced maize flour 2302 10  Locally produced maize bran 1106 20  Locally produced potato and manioc flour 
Tariff Description ……. ………..   4421.20.00.000 and 4421.99.00.900   Wooden coffins and other imported wooden articles    
9608.10 00 000 and 9608.30 00 000 Imported ballpoint pens 
2837.11.00.000; 2837.19.00.000 and 2837.20.00.000 
Cyanide 
3602.00.00.000 Explosive substances 3603.10 à 3603.60 Detonators 


=== PAGE 18 ===
 18 
CHAPTER IV MONEY TRANSFER TAX  A. Scope of application  Section 228 b: The following shall be liable to the money transfer tax:  - ......................................................................................................... ; - ......................................................................................................... ; - withdrawals made from electronic gambling and entertainment platforms.  C. Tariff   Section 228 d: (1) The tax shall be assessed at the rate of 0.2% of the amount transferred or withdrawn. This rate shall be increased to 1% for money transfers and withdrawals made via electronic gambling and entertainment platforms.                        (2) For postal money transfer transactions, the amount of money transfer tax shall be capped at the amount of the commission received by the service company.                         (3) Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 228 b of this Code, the amount of money transfer tax resulting from the application of the proportional rates provided for in paragraph (1) of this section shall be increased by a specific duty of CFAF 4 per transaction, including those carried out by credit and microfinance institutions.   PART V SPECIAL TAXES  CHAPTER I SPECIAL TAX ON PETROLEUM PRODUCTS   Section 231: The rates of the Special Tax on Petroleum Products are as follows: -  ………………………….. ; -  ………………………….. ; - 50 francs per cubic metre of industrial gas.  CHAPTER III FORESTRY TAXES  SECTION I FELLING TAX  Section 242: The felling tax shall be calculated on the basis of the FOB value of logs from logging permits of any kind, marked, unmarked and abandoned logs, and even logs from unauthorized logging operations, including communal and community forests.  

=== PAGE 19 ===
 19 
 Felling tax rates shall be set as follows:  - 2.5% for forestry companies that can prove that they have been duly certified by the competent authorities in terms of sustainable forest management; - 3% for companies with other forms of certification; - 5% for forestry companies with no certification.  Companies that do not hold a logging permit and that purchase log timber on the local market shall be jointly liable to pay the felling tax with the logger. In the absence of proof of payment of the felling tax by the logger, the tax shall be withheld at source by the purchaser when paying the invoice and remitted to the tax office of the company concerned no later than the 15th of the following month.   The felling tax due for a given month shall be payable on the 15th day of the month following the felling of a tree.   Failure to pay the felling tax due shall result in the suspension of exports by the logger in question.   The terms and conditions of assessment, collection and recovery as well as control of this tax shall be specified by decree.   SECTION V OTHER DUTIES AND TAXES  Section 247 a: (1) .............................................................................. ................                        (3) In any case, the export of the aforementioned products may only be authorized on presentation of a tax compliance certificate duly issued by the tax authorities.  The rest shall remain change.  SUB-PART II UNHARMONIZED LEGISLATION IN THE CEMAC ZONE  CHAPTER I RATES OF REGISTRATION FEES  DIVISION I PROPORTIONAL DUTIES  Section 543: The following shall be liable:   (a) ……………………. ; (b) ……………………. ; (c) The average rate of 5%:  -          ………………………………………… ; 

=== PAGE 20 ===
 20 
-          instruments and transfers provided for in Section 342 including rural leases for business uses and excluding leases for residential purposes;  -          ………………………………………… ; -          ………………………………………… . (d) The reduced rate of 2%:  -          ………………………………………… ; -          ………………………………………… ; -          ………………………………………… ; -          urban leases for residential purposes; -          ………………………………………… . (e) At the super reduced rate of 1%:  -          ………………………………………… ; -          ………………………………………… ; -          rural leases for residential purposes.  DIVISION II DEGRESSIVE FEES AND PROGRESSIVE FEES  Section 544: A - Degressive Fees  …………………………………………………………………………. ; B - Progressive fees  (a) Transfers for purposes of building for outright sale or leasing purchase …………………………………………………………………………. ; (b) Transmission on death:             (1) The fees for transmission on death provided for in Section 348 of this Code shall be progressive and charged as follows:   - in the 0 to 5 000 000 bracket ..........................................1%; - in the 5 000 001 to 10 000 000 bracket .........................2%; - in the 10 000 001 to 50 000 000 bracket .......................3%; - in the 50 000 001 to 500 000 000 bracket .....................4%; - above 500 000 000 bracket …........................................5%.  The rest shall remain unchanged.  DIVISION VI  SPLITTING OF DUTIES AND OTHER SPECIAL METHODS OF COLLECTING REGISTRATION DUTIES  Section 546 b: By derogation from the provisions of sections 304, 312 and 313 of this Code, the amount of registration duty may be split into instalments in the following cases and under the following conditions:  - for a long lease may be divided into as many payments as there are three-year periods in the term of the lease; - for transfers by death, over a maximum period of 2 (two) years.    

=== PAGE 21 ===
 21 
- Section 546 d: Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 542 of this Code, registration and stamp duties on imported second-hand vehicles shall be assessed and collected via the computerized system of the customs authorities, on behalf of the tax authorities. - The tax authorities, in conjunction with the relevant government services and entities, shall ensure that the assessed duties are repaid in accordance with the procedures laid down in a separate instrument issued by the Minister in charge of finance.  CHAPTER II STAMP DUTIES RATES  DIVISION II SPECIAL STAMP DUTIES PAYABLE ON SOME DOCUMENTS AND OTHER FEES B - IDENTITY CARDS AND RESIDENCE PERMITS Section 549: …………………………………………………………………….. :  (3) Residence cards  CFAF 75 000 for residence cards issued to members of duly recognized religious congregations, to unemployed spouses or minor dependent children of expatriates as well as to expatriate spouses of Cameroonians who have maintained their nationality of origin.  The rest shall remain unchanged.   E - LICENCES FOR HUNTING AND LIKE ACTIVITIES  Section 554: Licenses for hunting and the like activities shall be subject to the following fiscal stamp duty:  (1) Hunting licences: …………………………………………………………………………. ; (2) License to capture: …………………………………………………………………………. ; (3) License to collect: …………………………………………………………………………. ; (4) Scientific research licence for foreigners……………..  CFA F 100 000.      

=== PAGE 22 ===
 22 
SUB-PART III UNHARMONIZED CODE IN CEMAC ZONE  CHAPTER II PROPERTY TAX ON REAL ESTATE PROPERTY  DIVISION III CHARGEABLE EVENT  Section 579: (1) Ownership and de facto ownership of built-on or non-built-on estates shall constitute chargeable events of the property tax. (2) Property tax shall be due on the 1st January of each fiscal year. It shall be voluntarily settled no later than 30th June by the tax payers or his trustee, or on the basis of prefilled return, within the time limits provided for the return and payment of the Income Tax for Non-professionals.   CHAPTER VII AIRPORT STAMP DUTY  Section 606: Airport stamp duty shall be fixed at:  ii. For international flights out of the CEMAC zone:  - CFAF 40 000 per person per trip in economy class; - CFAF 75 000 per person and per trip in premium class; - CFAF 120 000 per person per trip in business class; - CFAF 300 000 per person per trip in first class.  BOOK TWO MANUAL OF TAX PROCEDURES  SUB-PART I BASIS OF ASSESSMENT  SINGLE CHAPTER OBLIGATIONS OF TAXPAYERS  DIVISION I OBLIGATIONS TO FILE RETURNS  SUBDIVISION I GENERAL PRINCIPLE  Section M 2: (1) Any physical person or legal entity liable, in their capacity as a legal debtor, to the payment of a tax, duty or charge or an advance payment of a tax, duty or charge, or designated to withhold tax at source pursuant to legal or regulatory provisions, is required to submit declarations, including the Statistical and Tax Returns (STR), in accordance with the model provided by the Cameroon Tax Authorities, appended by compulsory supporting documents, within the time limits stipulated by law. 

=== PAGE 23 ===
 23 
                  (2)……………………………………………………………………………                   (3) At least 15 (fifteen) days before the due date for payment of a tax, duty or charge, the tax authorities may electronically transmit a pre-filled return to the taxpayer on the basis of the information in their possession. This period shall be extended to thirty (30) days for annual returns.  The taxpayer shall return it to the tax authorities, via the relevant information system, within the set filing deadlines, after validating, correcting or supplementing it, where appropriate.  The tax authorities shall reserve the right to carry out checks and adjustments in accordance with the provisions of this Code, in particular those of sections M 2 bis and M 9 et seq. of the said Code.  Section M 2 c: (1) If a taxpayer fails to file a tax return for a period of 3 (three) consecutive years, the taxpayer shall be automatically removed from the taxpayer register of the tax authorities.                   (2) The removal from the database referred to in paragraph (1) above shall not entail the cancellation of any previous tax debts, nor any penalties incurred for breaches established during the period of inactivity.                    (3) The court with territorial jurisdiction shall be notified of the automatic removal of a company from the taxpayers' register to remove it from the Trade and Personal Property Credit Register (TPPCR).  SUBDIVISION II NOTICE TO FILE TAX RETURNS  Section M 3: (1) Any taxpayer who fails to file a return within the time limit prescribed by law shall receive a letter reminding him to do so. He shall then have 7 (seven) days to regularize his situation, following reception of the letter, the postmark or signed mail register, in case of direct delivery, being authentic.  Failing this, and without prejudice to the penalties that may apply, the basis of assessment may be determined arbitrarily by the tax authority under the conditions provided in Section M 29 et seq. of this Manual:                        (2) The formal notice to file a tax return referred to in paragraph 1 above may be served by any means of public communication deemed appropriate by the tax authorities, in particular by means of the press, public notices or publication on a designated website.  DIVISION II RECORD-KEEPING OBLIGATION AND PERIOD  Section M 6 b: (1) Any company subject to the obligation to certify its financial statements, pursuant to the provisions of the OHADA Uniform Act on Accounting Law and Financial Reporting, shall attach to its statistical and tax return a certification certificate duly issued by the approved statutory auditor.  

=== PAGE 24 ===
 24 
                             (2) (2) Failure to comply with the obligation referred to in paragraph 1 above shall result in the imposition of a fine of CFAF 50 million, which may not be remitted, without prejudice to the liability incurred by the statutory auditor.  DIVISION III OBLIGATION TO PAY TAXES  Section M 7: ………………………………………………………………………… With the exception of the specific case of some duties which shall be laid down by regulation, the payment of the aforementioned taxes and duties shall be made in accordance as follows:  - by bank transfer or electronic means; - in cash exclusively at bank counters or approved financial agents for localities  without bank branches.  In the specific case of companies with a specialized management unit, notably the entities managing medium-sized and large companies, taxes, duties and fees in excess of CFAF 100 000 must be paid by electronic means. By derogation from the methods of payment provided for in the above paragraphs of this section, transfer duties on death may, where appropriate, be paid in whole or in part by way of a dation in payment, in accordance with the conditions laid down by a special instrument issued by the Minister in charge of finance.  SUB-PART II TAX CONTROL  CHAPTER I  RIGHT TO CONTROL  DIVISION III  CONDITIONS FOR EXERCISING THE RIGHT TO CONTROL  SUBDIVISION I  ON-THE-SPOT CHECK   Section M 19 a (new): (1) Enterprises established in Cameroon which are dependent on or control companies located in Cameroon or outside Cameroon, within the scope of Section 19(a) of this Code, and which meet one of the conditions set out below, must make available to the tax authorities, on the date of commencement of the accounts audit, in electronic format, documentation enabling them to justify the pricing policy applied in transactions of any kind carried out with affiliated companies established in Cameroon or outside Cameroon in accordance with Section 19 (a) of this Code:  - have an annual turnover excluding tax or gross assets of an amount which is either equal to or greater than CFAF 1 000 000 000 (one billion); - hold directly or indirectly, at the end of the financial year, more than 25% of the share capital or voting rights of a company established in Cameroon or outside Cameroon whose annual turnover excluding tax or gross assets is greater than or equal to CFAF 1 000 000 000 (one billion). 

=== PAGE 25 ===
 25 
- be owned directly or indirectly, at the end of the financial year, more than 25% of the share capital or voting rights, by a company established in Cameroon or outside Cameroon whose annual turnover excluding tax or gross assets exceeds CFAF 1 000 000 000 (one billion).                (2) The content and format of the transfer pricing document which is not a substitute for supporting documents for each transaction shall be defined by a separate instrument.                 (3) If the required documentation is not handed over to the officials of the Tax Authorities or only partially on the date of commencement of the accounting audit, the Tax Authorities shall send to the enterprise concerned a formal warning to produce or complete it within 15 (fifteen) clear days, specifying the nature of the documents and addition expected. This formal notice must indicate the penalties applicable in the absence of a response or in the event of a partial response. The rest shall remain unchanged.   Section M 20 a: (1) Tax adjustments shall fall within the exclusive competence of the tax authority. Any other public body for the control of financial and social accounts other than the tax authority, which, during its control missions, finds tax law offences must automatically inform the tax authorities. The tax authorities shall immediately undertake a tax control operation under the conditions laid down by the General Tax Code.                      (2) When, in the normal discharge of their duties, the tax authorities discover cases of fraud or non-compliance with the tax benefits granted or non-compliance with the commitments made as part of the approval for a derogatory or special scheme, the said benefits shall be immediately suspended and the duties repaid in accordance with the terms of this Code, without prejudice to the other penalties provided for by the regulations in force.  DIVISION V  LIMITS TO THE RIGHT TO CONTROL  Section M 40: (1) Where accounts are audited, spot checks in the enterprise may not exceed three months save under special circumstances duly explained. Such time limit shall be extended by 9 (nine) months in the following cases: - …………………………………….. ; - ……………………………………..       (2)………………………………………………………………… ………………………………………………………                       (3) Notification to the taxpayer of a request for the production of documents or information shall suspend the aforementioned audit time limits from the date of such notification. The time limits shall begin to run again either on the date of presentation of the documents or information requested by the tax authorities or on the date on which the failure to comply is recorded in a report jointly signed by the tax authorities and the taxpayer.  Section M 41 a: (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections M 9, M 10, M 11, M 12, M 16 and M 21 of the Manual of Tax Procedures, a taxpayer may be exempted from a tax audit for a given fiscal year if, at the end of that year, the rate of increase 

=== PAGE 26 ===
 26 
in taxes and duties to be paid spontaneously is at least 20% compared to the previous year.  The rest shall remain unchanged.  SUB-PART III  TAX COLLECTION   CHAPTER II  PROSECUTION   DIVISION II  SPECIAL LEGAL PROCEEDINGS   SUBDIVISION I  NOTICE TO THIRD PARTY HOLDERS   Section M 71: Trustees, holders or debtors of sums belonging to or owed to persons liable to tax, penalties and incidental costs, whose collection as is guaranteed by the preferential rights of the Treasury, are bound, upon a request in that regard in the form of a notice to third party holder served by the tax collector to pay in lieu of the liable persons concerned, the funds in their keeping or which they owe, up to the amount of the taxes due from such liable persons.   The third party holder, upon receipt of the notice to third party holder, shall be required to inform the tax administration, within a maximum period of seventy-two (72) hours, of the balance of the account of the taxpayer being prosecuted. The said balance mentioned on the acknowledgement of receipt given to the tax administration shall be immediately allocated for the settlement of the taxpayer's tax debt. The rest shall remain unchanged.  SUB-DIVISION III  FREEZING OF BANK ACCOUNTS   Section M 76: Tax Revenue Collectors may freeze the taxpayer's bank accounts without prejudice to the penalties provided for elsewhere, in case of non-settlement on the due date, after formal notification of the sums duly assessed.  SUB-DIVISION V IMPOUNDMENT OF A VEHICLE  Section M 78: (1) Failure to present a valid vehicle registration document, a certificate of tax compliance and a certificate of payment of vehicle stamp duty to the authority in charge of controlling them, notably officers of the Directorate General of Taxation specially authorized to record this offence, will entail the impoundment of the vehicle in compliance with the appropriate procedure relating thereto.   The rest shall remain unchanged.     

=== PAGE 27 ===
 27 
SUB-DIVISION VI EXCLUSION FROM SPECIFIC PROCEDURES   Section M 79: Failure to pay taxes, duties or levies following  a formal notice shall entail a temporary ban from bidding for public contracts, expressing intention to buy a public corporation under privatization, participating in stock market transactions, applying for forest exploitation licences or applying for the issuance of secure documents; and a permanent ban in case of a further offence.  The Director General of Taxation shall each quarter draw up and publish a list of taxpayers banned from bidding.   CHAPTER III RECOVERY GUARANTEES  DIVISION III JOINT AND SEVERAL PAYMENT  Section M 86: The notice of issue for collection regularly drawn up shall be enforceable not only against the taxpayer who is mentioned therein but also against his representatives or rightful claimants. …………………………………………………………………………………………………. …………………………………………………………………………………………………. Where the rights over natural resources or stocks or shares of an enterprises under Cameroonian law are transferred abroad, the Cameroonian law enterprise, including subsidiaries, and the transferor shall be jointly and severally liable to payment of the sums due under such transfer.  The rest shall remain unchanged.  Section M 86 b: Where it is established that a single identification number has been fraudulently used in an operation or a transaction, the related taxes shall be jointly and severally payable by all the parties to the said operation or transaction.  SUB-PART IV PENALTIES   DIVISION II SPECIALPENALTIES  Section M 104: (1) A fixed fine of up to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs shall be applied to any person who provides false information, who objects to the right to communication or the notice to third-party holders , or who refuses to provide the information or documents required by the Tax Administration pursuant to the provisions of Sections 18 (4), 18 b (deleted), 74 a (5), 79, 93 j (6), 245, 598 a, M 1, M 6, M 8(d) and M 48 b of the Manual of Tax Procedures.  The rest shall remain unchanged. Section M 104 a: (1) A fixed fine of up to CFAF one hundred million (100,000,000) shall be imposed on any person who fraudulently facilitates, carries out or attempts to carry out a tax obligation or to obtain tax documents online.    

=== PAGE 28 ===
 28 
                             (2) The use or attempted use of falsified or fraudulently obtained tax documents, whether issued or purported to be issued by the tax administration's computer system, shall be punishable by a fixed fine of up to CFAF 50 000 000 without prejudice to criminal prosecution.  SUB-PART V TAX LITIGATION  CHAPTER I LITIGATION JURISDICTION  SUB-DIVISION II CLAIMS  Section M 116: (1) Any taxpayer who feels wrongly taxed or overtaxed may file a claim in writing to the Head of the Regional Taxation Centre, to the Director of the Large Taxpayers’ Office or to the Director General of Taxation, within thirty (30) days upon issuance of the collection notice or sure knowledge of the taxation.                             (3) The powers of the tax authorities shall be based on the amount of claim as follows:   - the Head of the Regional Taxation Centre with territorial jurisdiction, for claims less than or equal to seventy-five million (75 000 000) CFA Francs as principal;  - the Director of the Large Taxpayers’ Office, for claims not exceeding two hundred million (200 000 000) CFA Francs as principal;  - the Director General of Taxation, for claims exceeding the thresholds set for the Regional Taxation Centres and the Large Taxpayers’ Office.   CHAPTER THREE PROVISIONS RELATING TO OTHER RESOURCES  SECTION FIFTEEN: Renewal of the voluntary regularization programme  A. General Provisions  1. The Voluntary Tax Regularization Programme (hereinafter referred to as the "VTRP"), established by the Finance Law for the 2024 financial year, is extended for a period of two (2) years from 1 January 2025. 2. The purpose of the VTRP is to enable taxpayers to regularize their personal income tax (PIT) situation for the four (04) years preceding the date of entry into force of this programme. It shall apply to:   a. undeclared income or assets; b. revenues or assets that have been declared inaccurately or incompletely.   B. Eligible Persons  

=== PAGE 29 ===
 29 
3. The VTRP may be applied to natural persons resident or non-resident in Cameroon, with tax obligations in Cameroon and who are in a situation of failure to declare or who make an inaccurate or incomplete declaration, regardless of the type of income or assets concerned, may benefit from the VTRP.   C. Conditions for regularization  1. Regularization under the VTRP shall be carried out by means of voluntary disclosure. 2. Voluntary disclosure shall consist of the declaration, to tax authorities, of funds or assets that are not declared or declared incorrectly or incompletely, together with the payment of the tax due, calculated in accordance with the provisions of the tax legislation in force.  3. Voluntary disclosure must be: a. spontaneous, that is, carried out on the taxpayer's own initiative, without a tax audit or investigation being previously initiated by the tax authorities in respect of the taxes and the period referred to in paragraph 2 above; b. sincere, that is, carried out in good faith, by providing accurate and complete information about the funds or assets concerned; c. carried out within the time limits and in accordance with the procedures set by the tax authorities.  D. Effects of regularization  7. Regularization under the VTRP has the following effects:   a. immunity from criminal prosecution for tax offences relating to regularized funds or assets; b. the remission of 80% of late payment interest and penalties relating to taxes due on regularized funds or assets; c. the possibility of obtaining a payment schedule for the tax due, over a maximum period of one (01) year.  8. The tax administration shall issue the taxpayer a certificate of regularization certifying the regularization of one’s tax situation for the period concerned by the regularization.  E. Miscellaneous and transitional provisions  9. The information provided by the taxpayer in the context of the VTRP shall be covered by the obligation of professional secrecy. 10. Decisions taken by the tax administration in the context of the VTRP may be subject to the remedies provided for by the legislation in force. 11. The conditions for the application of this provision shall be specified by an instrument of the Minister in charge of finance.     

=== PAGE 30 ===
 30 
SECTION SIXTEEN: Extension of the deadlines for the declaration and payment of taxes and duties  1. The Minister in charge of finance may, as and when necessary, extend the deadlines for the declaration and payment of the taxes, duties, levies and fees provided for in the General Tax Code. 2. The extension shall be granted for a fixed period and may concern all taxpayers or be limited to certain categories of them. 3. The extension instrument shall specify the taxes, duties, levies and fees concerned, the new deadlines for declaration and payment, and the related implementing rules. The said instrument shall be made public by all means of communication.  SECTION SEVENTEEN: Establishment of an amnesty for transfers by death  1. A tax amnesty is introduced for transfers by death submitted for registration formalities between 1 January 2025 and 31 December 2025, as well as for transfers by death declared prior to 1 January 2025. 2. Transfers by death referred to in this Section shall be exempted from penalties and any other tax surcharges.  SECTION EIGHTEEN: Establishment of an amnesty for residential leases  1. A tax amnesty is introduced for registration fees relating to residential leases, submitted for registration between 1 January 2025 and 31 December 2025. 2. The residential leases referred to in this Section shall be exempted from penalties and any other tax surcharges in case of regularization of registration fees within the prescribed period.  SECTION NINETEEN: Renewal of a special tax settlement procedure for claims issued before 31 December 2022   1. The tax administration is authorized to implement a special settlement procedure for tax claims issued before 31 December 2022. 2. The special settlement procedure shall run from 1 January to 31 December 2025 and is carried out as follows:  (a) Settlement relating to taxes in litigation proceedings:  - for disputes in the administrative phase: 50% reduction on the disputed amount not yet paid, the deposits paid being taken by the Treasury. In this case, the amount to be paid may be subject to a schedule that may not exceed three months; - for disputes in the judicial phase: 65% reduction on the disputed amount not yet paid, the deposits paid being taken by the Treasury. In this case, the amount to be paid may be subject to a schedule that may not exceed three months; 

=== PAGE 31 ===
 31 
(b) Settlement relating to Undisputed Tax Arrears:  - for public or semi-public entities: 70% reduction with the possibility of spreading payments over no more than twelve months; - for private entities: 50% reduction with the possibility of spreading payments over no more than twelve months.  1. In order to implement the special settlement relating to disputed tax debts, the guarantees required by law in case of litigation must have been paid. 2. Tax arrears settled by the set-off procedure shall not be affected by this special settlement procedure. 3. No special settlement application shall be admissible after 31 December 2025. 4. In the event of acceptance of the settlement proposal by the taxpayer, the taxpayer expressly undertakes:  -          not to lodge a subsequent complaint; -          to withdraw any claims or complaints filed by him.  SECTION TWENTY: General Provisions Relating to the Conditions for the Payment of Non-Tax Revenue  1. The payment of non-tax revenue shall be made exclusively in accordance with the following procedures: • by bank transfer or electronic means, including mobile telephony; • in cash, exclusively at bank counters or with approved financial agents for localities without bank branches.  2. The new conditions for the payment of non-tax revenue provided for in point 1 above shall be applied from 1January 2026. 3. A separate instrument of the Minister in charge of finance shall specify the conditions for the application of this Section.  SECTION TWENTY-ONE: Provisions relating to non-tax revenues of the Livestock, Fisheries and Animal Industries sub-sector   The provisions of Section 13 a of Law No. 89/001 of 1 July 1989 on the Finance Law of the Republic of Cameroon for the 1989/1990 financial year are amended and supplemented as follows:            (1) The tax tariffs and rates for veterinary health inspection and for the use of animal and fishery products shall be fixed according to the following scale:  I- OPERATING TAXES 10. Permits for carriage by specialized vehicle: 10 000/year 24. Taxes on underwater fishing: 100 000 Francs 26. Tax on the exploitation of ornamental fish: 500 000 Francs 28. Exceptional tax on the collection of protected species: 200 000 Francs 29. Tax on the D licence (Licence for scientific fishing): 200 000 F 

=== PAGE 32 ===
 32 
 IV- VETERINARY HEALTH INSPECTION TAX ON FOREIGN TRADE   1- Export and import veterinary health inspection taxes   No.   ANIMALS AND PRODUCTS   EXPORT   IMPORT   …………………………………. …………. …………..   ………………………………….   …………. 2- Veterinary health inspection fees on international transit   …………………………………… ……………..   ……………………………………. …………….. 24. Large species (cows, horses, camels) 500 F/head 25. Small species (pigs and small ruminants) 200 F/head   …………………………… ………… 27. Pets 5 000 F/head 28. Wild and Sporting Animals 10 000 F/head   ………………………………. ...…………  (2) The offences relating to animal and fishery production activities are those provided for by Law No. 2000/017 of 19 December 2000 to regulate veterinary health inspection, Law No. 2024/008 of 24 July 2024 to lay down forestry and wildlife and regulations.  SECTION TWENTY-TWO: Amendment of certain provisions relating to State property, surveys and land tenure revenues              (1) The provisions of Section twenty-one of Law No. 2023/019 of 19 December 2023: Finance Law of the Republic of Cameroon for the 2024 financial year are amended and supplemented as follows:  Section 14 of Finance Law No. 90/001 of 29 June 1990 is amended as follows: Paragraph 1. - The tariffs of fees relating to the State property, surveys and land tenure operations listed in Article 14 of Ordinance No. 74/1 of 6 July 1974 to lay down the land tenure system are amended as follows: ………………………………………………………………………………………………….. V. TOPOGRAPHICAL AND CADASTRAL WORKS These works shall be divided into two groups:  -         topographical field work; -         office work. V.1 TOPOGRAPHICAL WORKS V.2 OFFICE WORKS V.2.1. Rates for drawing plans V.2.2. Rates for cadastral and topometric plan drawings ……………………………………………………………………………………………… Reproductions, printouts and photocopies by third parties of service documents, that is, geodetic sheets, cadastral extracts, cadastral maps and boundary plans, for the purpose of free or paid transfer are prohibited. (a) ................................................................................................... (b)      

=== PAGE 33 ===
 33 
(c) Plans of all kinds subject to the control and approval of the survey layout by approved surveyors registered with the Order of Surveyors shall be subject to  stamp duty tax and shall be subject to the payments provided for in Section 23 of Law No. 2022/020 of 27 December 2022 on the Finance Law of the Republic of Cameroon for the 2023 financial year. (d) ................................................................................................... X.  PROPERTY FEES FOR OCCUPYING PARTS OF THE STATE PROPERTY FOR ADVERTISING PURPOSE   1. The annual rate of the fee for the occupation of parts of the State property for advertising purposes, provided for by Ordinance No. 74-2 of 6 July 1974 to lay down State property regulations, is set at 30,000 CFA francs / m² excluding taxes. 2. Any previous provision repugnant to Subsection (1) above is repealed.  SECTION TWENTY-THREE: Provisions relating to the revenue from the affixing of approval stamps on the contracts of workers of foreign nationality.  The provisions of Section Twenty-Two of Law No. 2022/020 of 27 December, 2022 on the Finance Law of the Republic of Cameroon for the 2023financial year  are amended and supplemented as follows:                 (1) A levy is hereby introduced in respect of: - a work visa fee on the contracts of foreign nationals; - for work visas affixed on  the contracts of consultants or experts of foreign nationality; - fees for the granting and renewal of authorization to open private vocational training structures.                  (2) Provisions relating to the fees for work visas affixed on the contracts of workers of foreign nationality.  (a) All natural persons of foreign nationality who apply for an employment contract on Cameroonian territory, subject to international conventions, shall be subject to work visa fees; (b) The above-mentioned fee shall be fixed at: • The equivalent of two (2) months' salary and gross wages for non-African workers; • The equivalent of one (01) month's salary and gross wages for African workers, with a 50% reduction.  (c) Without prejudice to the accrued visa fees assessed in accordance with the conditions provided for in paragraph 2 of this Section, any employer using a worker of foreign nationality in violation of the laws and regulations in force, shall be punished by a penalty equivalent to three (03) months' wages and gross salary per worker of foreign nationality employed in an irregular situation or twice the amount of the above-mentioned fees. 

=== PAGE 34 ===
 34 
(3) Provisions relating to the fees for work visas affixed to the contracts of consultants or experts of foreign nationality.  (a) Any natural person of foreign nationality who applies for an employment contract as a consultant or expert, on Cameroonian territory, subject to international conventions, shall be liable to a work visa fee; (b) The above-mentioned fee is fixed at the equivalent of 5% of the amount of the fees of the individual consultant or the expert of foreign nationality; (c) Without prejudice to the accrued visa fees assessed in accordance with the conditions provided for in paragraph 3 of this Section, any employer using a consultant or expert of foreign nationality in violation of the laws and regulations in force shall be punished by a penalty equivalent to 5% of the amount of the fees of the individual consultant or the expert of foreign nationality employed in an irregular situation or twice the amount of the above-mentioned fees.                   (4) The visa fees provided for in paragraph 1 of this Section shall be  collected by the employer. They are required before the work visa is affixed by the Minister responsible for employment matters.  The use of individual consultants of foreign nationality who are operating illegally shall be considered an offence within the meaning of this paragraph.                     (5) Fees are introduced for the granting and renewal of authorizations to open private vocational training structures.  a) Promoters of private vocational training structures are subject to the fees; b) The authorization to open a private vocational training structure shall be valid for three (03) years.  The persons referred to in subparagraph (a) of this paragraph shall be subject to the payment of a fee of CFAF 300 000 for the costs of granting the authorization to open and renew the said authorization.  SECTION TWENTY-FOUR: Provisions relating to non-tax revenue from the trade sector  The provisions of SECTION TWENTY-FOUR of Law No. 2023/019 of 19 December 2023 on the Finance Law of the Republic of Cameroon for the 2024 financial year are amended and supplemented as follows:  (1) The following are instituted in the trade sector: - ………………………………………………………………………………………; - ………………………………………………………………………………………; - ………………………………………………………………………………………; - ………………………………………………………………………………………; - ………………………………………………………………………………………; - exemption fees for Cameroonian subsidiaries of foreign natural or legal persons eligible for this regime; 

=== PAGE 35 ===
 35 
- operating costs of the official list of reference prices of goods and services in the context of public procurement; - fees for requesting price validation in the context of public procurement.  (2) Provisions relating to application fees for authorization to carry on business in Cameroon.  (a) The following are subject to payment, every three (03) years, of the application fees for authorization to carry out commercial activity in Cameroon referred to in paragraph 1 above:  - Legal entities engaged in commercial activities with at least 50% of share capital  owned by foreigners; - Natural persons carrying out commercial activities in Cameroon who are not Cameroonian nationals.  (b) The application fees for authorization to carry out commercial activity in Cameroon shall be set as follows:  - CFAF 1 500 000 for public limited companies (PLC) and simplified joint stock companies; - CFAF 1 000 000 for Limited Liability Companies, General Partnerships and Limited Partnerships; - CFAF 500 000 for individual.  (c) In addition to the fees provided for in paragraph 1 (b) above, applications for regularization of the authorization to carry out a commercial activity in Cameroon submitted by foreign natural or legal persons (already registered in the Trade and Personal Property Credit Register or simply holders of a tax registration) are subject to the payment of a penalty of CFAF 100 000 for natural persons and CFAF 250 000 for legal persons.   (3) Provisions relating to the annual application fees for authorization to import motorcycles and their spare parts:  (a) ....................................................................................................; (b) The costs referred to in paragraph 1 above shall be fixed as follows:  - CFAF 2 000 000 for public limited companies (PLC) and simplified joint-stock companies; - CFAF 1 500 000 for Limited Liability Companies, General Partnerships and Limited Partnerships; - CFAF 500 000 for individuals.  (4) Provisions relating to fees for examining the application for a certificate of declaration of existence.  

=== PAGE 36 ===
 36 
(a) ............................................................................................; (b) The fees for examining the application file for a certificate of declaration of existence are set as follows per period of five (05) years:  - CFAF 2 000 000 for public limited companies (PLC) and simplified joint stock companies; - CFAF 1 000 000 for Limited Liability Companies, General Partnerships and Limited Partnerships; - CFAF 500 000 for individuals, natural persons.  (c) However, the following are exempt from paying the fees for examining the application for a certificate of declaration of existence:  -         producers and their duly established organizations; -         local units and industrialists who process the said products.  (5) Provisions relating to the application fee for a deficiency certificate for any product subject to excise duty prior to its import by an economic operator.  a) ........................................................................................ (b) ........................................................................................ (c) ........................................................................................  (d) Where the application for a deficiency certificate covers several products, the fees provided for in paragraph 5 (c) above shall be levied per product concerned.  (6) Provisions relating to the application fees for metrology approval issued by the Minister in charge of trade for a period of three (03) years.    (a) Importers, manufacturers, suppliers and repairers of measuring instruments, as well as providers of metrology services, metrological calibration and testing laboratories, are subject to payment of the application fee for metrology approval.   (b) The fees for applying for metrology approval are set as follows:  - for importers, repairers and manufacturers of measuring instruments as well as metrological service providers: CFAF 1 000 000 for natural persons and CFAF 2 000 000 for legal persons; - for metrological calibration and testing laboratories:  CFAF 1 000 000 for natural persons and CFAF 2 000 000 for legal persons.  (c) Where the application for metrology approval covers several activities, the fees provided for in paragraph 6 (b) above shall be charged per branch of activity concerned.  

=== PAGE 37 ===
 37 
(7) Provisions relating to the offences provided for in Law No. 2015/018 of 21 December 2015 governing commercial activity in Cameroon.  (a) Infringements of the provisions of Law No. 2015/018 of 21 December 2015 governing commercial activity in Cameroon shall be punishable by a financial penalty of 5% of the annual turnover of the offending trader or professional, with a minimum amount of CFAF thirty thousand (30 000) for natural persons and CFAF one hundred thousand (100 000) for legal persons.   (b) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 7 (a) above, the offences referred to in Section 91, paragraph 2, of the said Law No. 2015/018 of 21 December 2015 governing commercial activity in Cameroon are punishable by a financial penalty of 10% of the annual turnover recorded by the offending trader or professional, with a minimum amount of CFAF one hundred thousand (100 000) for natural persons and CFAF two hundred and fifty thousand (250. 000) for legal persons.  (8) Provisions relating to the fees for applying for exemption from the obligation for Cameroonian subsidiaries of foreign natural or legal persons eligible for this regime to be transferred to a Cameroon incorporated pre-existing or yet to be established company after the two-year period.  (a) Any Cameroonian subsidiary of a foreign natural or legal person eligible for the exemption regime provided for in Article 120 of the OHADA Uniform Act relating to the law of commercial companies and economic interest groupings shall be subject to the payment of the exemption fees. (b) The exemption fee is set at CFAF 5 000 000 per application. (c) However, for Cameroonian subsidiaries of foreign natural or legal persons under a special regime, the above-mentioned fees are set at CFAF 1 000 000 per renewal application. (d) Any application for exemption or renewal of the certificate submitted after the deadline provided for by the laws/regulations in force shall be liable to a penalty of CFAF 250 000.  (9) Provisions relating to the fee for the use of the official list of reference prices of goods and services in the context of public procurement. (a) Any supplier of goods or service provider in the context of a public procurement, any economic operator responsible for executing a purchase order, a letter of order or a public contract is subject to the payment of fees for the use of the official list  of reference prices of goods and services. (b) The fees for the use of the official list of reference prices of goods and services are set at CFAF 10 000 for all types of public contracts. (c) The proof of payment of the abovementioned fees is a document required in the administrative package for the authorization and validation of the contract.  (10) Provisions relating to the application fees for the validation of the prices of goods or the tariffs of services not referenced in the official price list, in the context of public procurement.  

=== PAGE 38 ===
 38 
(a) Applications submitted by the authorizing officer of the expenditure item concerned in the context of public procurement for the validation of the prices of goods or tariffs of services not referenced in the official price list are subject to validation fees according to the following rates: · Purchase order: CFAF 15 000; · Letter order: CFAF 35 000; · Public contract: CFAF 50 000.  (b) The payment of the above validation application fees is the responsibility of the successful bidder of the public procurement. Under penalty of rejection of the application, the payment of the above-mentioned fees must be made at the latest: · Seven (07) days after the referral to the Minister in charge of prices for purchase orders; · Fourteen (14) days after the referral to the Minister in charge of prices for letters of order and public contracts.  SECTION TWENTY-FIVE: Amendment of certain provisions relating to non-tax revenues from the higher education sector   The provisions of Section twenty-six of Law No. 2023/019 of 19 December 2023: Finance Law of the Republic of Cameroon for the 2024 financial year are amended and supplemented as follows:  (1) The following shall be instituted in the higher education sector: - ……………………………………………………………….. ; - ……………………………………………………………….. ; - ……………………………………………………………….. ; - ……………………………………………………………….. ; - the fees for the authentication of diplomas; - fees for the issuance of duplicates; - fees for approval, change of promoter, name and extension of private higher education institutes; (2) ………………………………………………………………………………  (3) ……………………………………………………………………………… (4) ……………………………………………………………………………… (5) ……………………………………………………………………………… (6) Provisions relating to diploma authentication fees:   (a) With the exception of the public administration, any legal entity requesting the authentication of a diploma issued by the Ministry in charge of higher education or a public higher education institution is subject to payment of the fees referred to in this paragraph.   (b) The authentication fees referred to in this paragraph are set as follows:  Type of authentication fee Amount to be paid 

=== PAGE 39 ===
 39 
(CFAF) National diplomas for IPES (Bacc, GCE AL, BTS, HND, HPD, DSEP) 1 500 National diplomas for private administrations 5 000 National diplomas for International Organizations (Embassies, WES, ICAS, ECE) 25 000  (7) Provisions relating to fees for the production of duplicates of diplomas  Fees for the production of duplicates of the diplomas referred to in this paragraph is set at CFAF 5,000 per diploma. (8) Provisions relating to fees for the creation, opening, granting of approval, accreditation, change of promoter, name and extension of courses, of private higher education institutions  (a) Promoters of private higher education institutions are subject to the payment of the fees referred to in this paragraph. (b) The fees referred to in paragraph (a) above are fixed as follows: Type of fees Amount to be paid (CFAF) Comments Request for agreement to create a private higher education institution 500 000  Authorization to open a commercial programme  250 000  Authorization to open a communication programme 250 000  Authorization to open a tourism and social programme 250 000  Authorization to open an environmental science programme 300 000  Authorization to open an industrial and technology programme 400 000  Authorization to open an agricultural programme  400 000  Authorization to open a health sciences programme 500 000  Application for accreditation  500 000 Per programme Application for approval of staff in duty posts  10 000 Per file Application for approval of permanent teaching staff   10 000 Per file Application for approval of a private higher education institution 1 000 000 Per specialty Application to open the Professional Bachelor's degree programme 500 000 Per programme Application to open a Professional Master's degree programme 600 000 Per programme Application to open the engineering cycle 600 000 Per programme  

=== PAGE 40 ===
 40 
ARTICLE TWENTY-SIX: Provisions relating to non-tax revenue from the housing and urban development sector   The provisions of Section Thirty of Law No. 2023/019 of 19 December 2023: Finance Law of the Republic of Cameroon for the 2024 financial year are amended and supplemented as follows:  (1) The revenue of the housing and urban development sector is made up of:  - Annual fees are charged for obtaining or renewing the authorization as real estate developer, real estate agent or co-ownership manager; - The fines, sanctions and penalties relating to the unlawful exercise of real estate professions as provided for by Law No. 97/003 of 10 January 1997 on Real Estate Development, Law No. 2001/020 of 18 December 2001 to organize the real estate agent profession, and Law No. 2010/022 of 21 December 2010 on co-ownership of buildings. (2) ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… (3) ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… (4) ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  (5) Without prejudice to the penal sanctions provided for by the instruments referred to in paragraph 1 above, the amounts of the fines, sanctions and penalties relating to the unlawful exercise of real estate professions are hereby fixed as follows:   No. DESCRIPTION FINES REAL ESTATE DEVELOPERS/PROMOTERS 
01 
Any person who: - habitually engages in or lends his assistance, even on an ancillary basis, to property development operations in breach of the conditions laid down by this law; - fails, upon request, to provide the staff of the competent ministry in charge of control with the documents required to carry out such control, or obstructs them in the performance of their duties  
From CFAF 50 000 to CFAF 2 000 000 
 Any person who demands or accepts a payment, deposit of funds, subscription or acceptance of commercial paper in breach of the rules governing the formation of non-trading property companies  
 From CFAF 100 000 to CFAF 300 000 
 Any person who contravenes the incompatibilities and prohibitions resulting from Sections 9 and 10 of Law No. 97/003 of 10 January 1997 on real estate From CFAF 100 000 to CFAF 7 500 000  

=== PAGE 41 ===
 41 
No. DESCRIPTION FINES development  Anyone who contravenes the provisions of this law relating to construction companies pursuing several programmes  From CFAF 5 000 000 to CFAF 7 500 000 
 
Any person who: - gives inaccurate or incomplete information in the contracts or documents provided for by this law in the performance of the said contracts or documents, provides or attempts to provide misleading information as to the quality, quantity or dimensions of the construction, materials, equipment or products used or supplied; - impedes the action of control bodies; - ensures in law or in fact, directly or through an intermediary, the management of a real estate development company. In bad faith, uses the company's assets or credit, or the powers or votes at his/her disposal, in a manner that they know to be contrary to the company's interests, for personal gain or to favour another company or undertaking of any kind in which they have a direct interest  
From CFAF 100 000 to CFAF 7 500 000 
REAL ESTATE AGENTS 
 
Any person who habitually engages in or lends assistance, even on an ancillary basis, to the transactions referred to in Section 3 of Law No. 2001/020 of 18 December 2001 governing the profession of real estate agent, without holding the licence instituted by this Law or who, after ceasing to fulfil the conditions for the granting of such licence, engages in or lends assistance, even on an ancillary basis, to the same transactions; Any person acting as the legal or statutory representative of a legal entity who habitually engages in or lends his or her assistance, even on an ancillary basis, to the transactions referred to in Section 3 of Law No. 2001/020 of 18 December 2001 governing the profession of estate agent, where he or she does not meet the conditions laid down in Section 6 of the aforementioned law; The same penalties are applicable to any person who, without having been authorized, negotiates, enters into 
From CFAF 100 000 to CFAF 1 500 000 and, in the event of a repeat offence From CFAF 900 000 to CFAF 3 000 000 

=== PAGE 42 ===
 42 
No. DESCRIPTION FINES agreements or makes commitments on behalf of the holder of a professional licence. 
 
Any Real Estate Agent who fails to communicate, at their request, to the State agents responsible for checking documents, registers, attestations, posters to which Real Estate Agents are subject in the exercise of their profession as well as, where applicable, any bank or accounting documents or written proxy letters or who, in general, obstructs the State agents from performing their duties. 
 From CFAF 100 000 to CFAF 1 500 000 
CO-OWNERSHIP TRUSTEES  Co-owners who violate the provisions of the co-ownership regulations or resolutions of the General Meeting. From CFAF 10 000 to CFAF 100 000 
 
Co-owners who, without paying the charges for the supply of services, fraudulently connect to the networks supplying the said services and belonging either to the network supplier, to the co-ownership or to another co-owner;  Co-owners who have a network established, operated or supplied to those among them who refuse to pay the common charges or their individual consumption charges. 
 From CFAF 50 000 to CFAF 200 000  
 
Any person who: - habitually engages in or assists, even on an ancillary basis, in transactions falling within the remit of a managing agent for co-ownership without having the status of a managing agent or without holding a professional licence; - acting as the legal or statutory representative of a legal entity, habitually engages in or provides assistance, even on an ancillary basis, in transactions falling within the remit of a co-ownership property manager, where he or she does not meet or ceases to meet the conditions for practicing the said profession. 
From CFAF 200 000 to CFAF 1 000 000 
 Anyone who violates one of the prohibitions on practicing the profession of co-ownership managing agent by using forgery to cause the authority responsible for issuing the professional card to issue to him/her. 
From CFAF 500 000 to CFAF 1 500 000 

=== PAGE 43 ===
 43 
 SECTION TWENTY-SEVEN: Provisions relating to non-tax revenue and fines from the maritime, river and lake transport sector  The provisions of Section thirty-five of Law No. 2023/019 of 19 December 2023: Finance Law of the Republic of Cameroon for the 2024 financial year are amended and supplemented as follows:  (1) Non-tax revenue from the maritime, river and lake transport sub-sector constitutes service revenue duly entered in the State budget. (2) Non-tax revenue from the maritime, river and lake transport sub-sector shall be derived from: - the issuance of licences for the exercise of maritime and para-maritime professions; - the issuance of identification documents for seafarers; - the registration of floating vessels (ships, canoes, boats); - the conduct of ship safety inspections (commissioning inspection, annual inspection, exceptional inspection); - the issuance of certificates of competency to pilot tugs and engine canoes, and of driving licences for pleasure craft; - keeping the register of maritime mortgages; - the fines resulting from maritime, river and lake transport offences; - the fees of the Shipping Commission for the development of the maritime sector.  (3) Fees for the issuance of licences to practice maritime and para-maritime professions. (a) Any natural or legal person wishing to exercise maritime and para-maritime professions is required to obtain an authorization issued in accordance with the regulations in force. (b) The fees for the issuance of the authorization referred to in paragraph (a) of this subsection are set as follows: - Fees for issuing provisional approval: CFAF 500 000/activity; - Fees for issuing approval for a ship maintenance unit: CFAF 200 000. (4) Fees for issuing seafarers' identification documents.  (a) Any person wishing to work as a seafarer is required to obtain the identification documents stipulated by the regulations in force.  (b) The cost of issuing the identification documents for seafarers referred to in paragraph (a) of this subsection is set at CFAF 20 000 per document. (5) Registration fees for floating vessels.  (a) Any natural or legal person wishing to register a floating craft in Cameroon shall be subject to the payment of registration fees. (b) The registration fees referred to in paragraph (a) of this subsection are fixed as follows: 

=== PAGE 44 ===
 44 
DESCRIPTION Price to be paid (in CFAF) Paddle canoes 0-5 gross tonnes (fixed duty)  2 000 Motor canoes and boats 0-20 gross tonnes (fixed duty)  30 000 Canoes and boats 21-50 gross tonnes (fixed duty) 50 000 Vessels of 51-99 gross tonnes (fixed duty) 100 000 Vessels of 100-10,000 gross tonnes (fixed duty) 150 000 Vessels over 10,000 gross tonnes (fixed duty) 150 000 + 100 Francs per additional 10 000 gross tonnes Cameroonization deed 100 000 Deregistration certificate 200 000 Certificate of non-encumbrance 50 000 Changes or modifications to the description of the vessel  50 000 Changes or modifications to the description of the boat or dugout canoe  20 000 Crew list certificate  50 000 Transfer 100 000 Change of ship name 50 000 Tonnage conformity certificate 50 000  (6) Floating vessels safety inspection fees  (a) Any safety inspection of a floating craft is subject to the payment of a fee by the owner. (b) The fees referred to in paragraph (a) of this subsection are based on gross tonnage and are set as follows: DESCRIPTION Amount to be paid (CFAF) Paddle canoes 0-5 gross tonnes (fixed duty) 2 000 Motor canoes and boats 0-20 gross tonnes (fixed duty)  10 000 Motor canoes and boats 21-30 gross tonnes (fixed duty)  20 000 Vessels or craft with a gross tonnage of less than 50 (fixed duty) 30 000 Vessels or craft with a gross tonnage of 50 tonnes or more but less than 100 tonnes (fixed duty) 50 000 Vessels or craft with a gross tonnage of more than 100 tonnes (fixed duty) 100 000 Fixed duty of CFAF 100,000 plus a proportional fee of CFAF 50 per gross registered tonne with a minimum collection of  300 000  (7) Fees for the certificate of operational ability to pilot tugboats and motorized canoes, and for licenses to pilot  pleasure craft. 

=== PAGE 45 ===
 45 
a- The issuance of the certificate for operational ability to pilot tugboats and motorized canoes, as well as the licence to pilot pleasure craft is subject to payment of fees by the applicant. b- The fees referred to in paragraph (a) of this subsection are set as follows: • Certificate for operational ability to pilot tugboats and pleasure craft: CFAF 25 000; • Licence to pilot motorized canoes and other vessels: CFAF 20 000. (8) Fees for registration on the Maritime Mortgage Register. a- Registration on the Maritime Mortgage Register is subject to payment of fees by the applicant. b- The fees referred to in paragraph (a) of this subsection are set at: CFAF 250 000 per mortgage contract. (9) Fines in the sea, river and lake transport subsector. Fines in the sea, river and lake transport subsector are set as follows: a- Various vessels and motorized canoes: • Lack of registration certificate: CFAF 50 000 • Lack of seaworthiness or boating license: CFAF 25 000 • Absence of fire extinguisher: CFAF 25 000 • Absence of lifejackets for canoes and other passenger crafts: CFAF 20 000/missing lifejacket • Absence of life buoy: CFAF 25 000 • Absence of a registration number and/or of a load line: CFAF 25 000 • Lack of pilot’s license for motorized canoe or other crafts: CFAF 25 000 • Absence of first aid kit: CFAF 1 000 for motorized canoes and CFAF 5 000 for vessels. b- Vessels, tugboats and barges: • No registration certificate: CFAF 500 000 • No seaworthiness certificate: CFAF 300 000 • No employment contract: CFAF 500 000 • No insurance: CFAF 1 000 000 • No crew list: CFAF 50 000 • Not pest control certificate: CFAF 200 000 • Poor management of medical products: CFAF 150 000 • AIS faulty or not switched on: CFAF 1 000 000 • Faulty radar: CFAF 700 000  • Poor operation of the GMDSS equipment: CFAF 1 500 000 • Lack of Officers’ certificates: CFAF 50 000/Officer 

=== PAGE 46 ===
 46 
• Forged registration: CFAF 5 000 000 • Absence of load line: CFAF 1 000 000 c- Absence of approval: • Master/Captain: CFAF 100 000 • Officers/Lieutenants: CFAF 100 000 • Chief engineer/chief mechanic: CFAF 100 000 • Lack of seaman’s license on board: CFAF 50 000 per sailor. d- Lack of certificates: • Certificate of operational ability to pilot tugboats: CFAF 30 000 • Certificate of operational ability to pilot motorized canoes: CFAF 20 000 • Licence to pilot motorized pleasure craft: CFAF 40 000 e- Carriage of illicit goods: • The fine for the carriage of illicit goods is set at 25% of the FOB value of the goods transported followed by the delisting of the floating vessel • Navigating in an area under sanctions or in an area prohibited under international agreements • Practice of oil and other prohibited products transshipment among vessels or with vessels connected to States under international sanctions: CFAF 10 000 000 with the delisting of the vessel. (10) Shipowner’s Commission duties for the development of the maritime sector. a- Any natural or legal person owner of vessels calling at various Cameroonian ports is subject to the payment ship-owning fees on behalf of the shipowners they represent. b- The applicable rate of the shipowner’s fee on transported goods tonnage is set as follows: • CFAF 800 on import • CFAF 600 on export.    SECTION TWENTY-EIGHT: Provisions on non-tax revenues from the arts and culture sector  (1) Revenues from the arts and culture sector comprise:  - Fees for the issuance and renewal of national archaeological firm authorizations;  - Fees for the issuance and renewal of international archaeological firm authorizations; - Fees for archaeological excavation by authorized archaeological firms; 

=== PAGE 47 ===
 47 
- Fees for application and renewal of authorization for cinematographic works distributors; - Fees for application and renewal of authorization for cinematographic works operators.  (2) Fees for authorization and permission to conduct archaeological excavation:  (a) Fees for the authorization and permission to conduct archaeological excavation are set as follows:  - Authorization for national archaeological firms: CFAF 300 000;  - Authorization for international archaeological firms: CFAF 1 000 000; - Permit for archaeological excavation for authorized firms: 0.3 % of total cost for the work to be done;  (b)  The abovementioned authorizations are issued for a period of two (02) years.  (3) Fees for application for authorization for cinematographic works distributors are set at: CFAF 200 000 / applicant / year.  (4) Authorization application fees for operators of cinematographic works are set at: CFAF 200 000/applicant/year.  SECTION TWENTY-NINE: Provisions on non-tax revenues from the public contracts sector  (1) Non-tax revenues from the public contracts sector are service revenues duly entered in the State budget.  (2) These revenues comprise: - Fees for the review of applications for categorization;  - Fees for obtaining electronic certificates as part of the online public procurement process;  - Fees for examining applications for lifting of bans concerning public procurement actors;  - Fees for the consideration of complaints filed by public procurement bidders. (3) Fees for the review of applications for categorization.  (a) Companies under Cameroonian law and individuals operating in the public contracts sector are subject to compulsory prior presentation of a categorization certificate issued by the authority in charge of public contracts.  (b) The categorization certificate referred to in paragraph (a) of this subsection is issued by the authority in charge of public contracts based on the 

=== PAGE 48 ===
 48 
following rates, depending on the categories specified in the Call for Categorization File:  ü Category A: CFAF 300 000  ü Category B: CFAF 200 000  ü Category C: CFAF 100 000  ü Category D: CFAF 50 000  ü Category E: CFAF 25 000.  (4) Fees to obtain electronic certificates  (a) Obtaining an Electronic certificate issued by the relevant Local Registration Officer is a prerequisite for the transactional use of COLEPS (Cameroon Online E-Procurement System) digital platform for public contracts.  (b) The issuance of the electronic certificate is subject to the payment of yearly fees set at: CFAF 100 000.  (5) Fees for examining applications for lifting of bans concerning actors of public procurement  (a) Any operator banned from public procurement under the conditions stated by the Public Contracts Code wishing to resume activities must submit an application for examining the lifting of the ban to the authority in charge of Public Contracts.  (b) The application referred to in paragraph (a) of this subsection is subject to the payment of non-refundable review fees set at 2% of the estimated amount of the contract to which the suspension was applied and capped at CFAF 1 000 000.  (6) Fees for consideration of complaints filed by public procurement bidders   (a) Any public procurement bidder who feels injured at any phase of the procedure may lodge an appeal before the Appeals Review Committee (CER), subject to payment of the relevant non-refundable fee.  (b) The appeal referred to in Paragraph (a) above shall be subject to payment of a non-refundable fee, amounting to 1% of the estimated amount of the disputed contract, and capped at CFAF 500 000.  SECTION THIRTY: Provisions relating to mining and industrial revenue   The provisions of Section 26 of Law No. 2022/020 of 27 December 2022: Finance Law of the Republic of Cameroon for the 2023 Financial Year are amended and supplemented as follows:  Paragraph (2): Revenue from the mining and industry sub-sector shall comprise: 

=== PAGE 49 ===
 49 
- …………………………………………… ; - Cost of secure waybills; - …………………………………………… ; - …………………………………………… ; - Annual inspection and control costs for establishments classified dangerous, insanitary or inconvenient; - Cost of the authorization to set up and operate a 1st class establishment; - Cost of declaring the setting-up and operation of a 2nd class establishment; - Approval and renewal fees for natural or legal persons; - Penalties for failure to present a secure waybill for the transportation of quarry products; - Cost of the authorization to provide geological services; - Geological and mining data consultation and acquisition costs; - Cost of the authorization to set up and operate surface and permanent storage sites, for the storage of explosive substances and detonators; - Cost of the authorization for local purchase, transfer, import and transit of explosive substances and detonators; - Fee to review applications for the granting and renewal of mining permits and other authorizations and transactions;  - Fee for issuance of mineral substances export certificates; - Cost of reviewing applications for permits to exploit spring water, mineral and thermo-mineral water as well as geothermal deposits.  Paragraph (3):  The mining and industry sub-sector revenues listed below shall, based on their nature, be collected as follows:   (1) ………………………………………………………………………………………………. (2) Regarding the cost of secure waybills produced by the State and made available to industrial and commercial quarries, as well as artisanal quarries, the amount is set at CFAF 5 000 per consignment, payable by the holder of the mining permit or authorization who shall be legally liable therefor. (a) For industrial and commercial quarries, secure waybills shall be issued by the territorially competent Divisional Delegate of Mining, who shall be responsible for notifying the mining permit or licence holders. (b) For artisanal quarries, the procedure for payment and collection of secure waybill costs shall be set out in a separate instrument by the Minister in charge of mines. (c) Failure to present the secure waybill during transportation of mineral substances shall result in impounding of the vehicle and payment of a fine of CFAF 25 000 per consignment (or per truckload), without prejudice to collection of the evaded amount.  (3) The geological and mining data consultation and acquisition fee shall be collected as follows: 

=== PAGE 50 ===
 50 
(a) The acquisition fee shall be set as per the following conditions: ……………………………………………………………………………. ……………………………………………………………………………. However, in the specific case of an exploration permit application and a request for data by the exploration permit holder, the fee for obtaining geological and mining data shall be set at CFAF 10 000 000 (ten million), limited to the surface area covering the exploration activities. Exploration permit applications must be accompanied by a data consultation fee receipt, failing which it shall be rejected.  (b) Consultation fee: Subject to payment of a consultation fee, the following may access geological and mining data: - mining operators; - researchers; - any person interested in consulting such data.  Consulting geological and mining data shall be subject to presentation of an access card, valid for 1 (one) year, and issued following a subscription with the entity responsible for keeping geological and mining data. The amount of the said subscription shall be set as follows:  - nationals and Cameroonian mining companies: CFAF 30 000; - foreigners: CFAF 60 000. (4) Regarding the fee for authorization to provide geological services (a) Companies and firms providing geological services shall be liable to payment of an authorization fee, based on whether they are in the first or second class. (b) The fee for authorization to provide 1st class geological services shall be set as follows: Activities  Amount in CFAF For authorization For renewal  Airborne geophysical works, drilling of boreholes, processing and analysis of samples and feasibility studies 1 000 000 2 000 000 (c) The fee for authorization to provide 2nd class geological services shall be set as follows: Activities  Amount in CFA francs For authorization For renewal  Geological mapping, ground geophysics and geochemical prospecting 500 000 1 000 000  (5) Mineral substances export certificate costs shall be set at: CFAF 20 000 per sheet. 

=== PAGE 51 ===
 51 
(6) Fees for authorization to set up and operate surface and permanent storage sites, storage of explosive substances and detonators, as well as for granting authorization for local purchase, transfer, import and transit of explosive substances and detonators shall be set as follows:  (a) Fee for authorization to set up and operate surface and permanent storage sites, storage of explosive substances and detonators: - Authorization: CFAF 1 500 000 - Renewal: CFAF 2 000 000 (b) Fees for authorization to set up and operate surface and permanent storage sites, storage of commercial explosive substances and detonators: - Authorization: CFAF 3 000 000 - Renewal: CFAF 5 000 000 (c) Fees for authorization to set up and operate commercial explosive substances and detonators manufacturing plants: - Authorization: CFAF 5 000 000  - Renewal: CFAF 10 000 000 (d) Fees for authorization of local purchase and transfer of explosive substances and detonators: - Authorization: CFAF 200 000 - Renewal: CFAF 250 000 (e) Fees for authorization to import or destroy explosive substances and detonators: - Authorization: CFAF 300 000 - Renewal: CFAF 350 000 (7) Fees reviewing applications for the grant and renewal of mining permits and other authorizations and transactions shall be set as follows: No. Item Amount in CFAF I Mining regime    I-1  Artisanal mining permit Authorization 500 000 Renewal 750 000  I-2  Semi-mechanized artisanal mining permit Authorization 2 000 000 Renewal 3 500 000  I-3  Research permits Authorization 1 000 000 Renewal  2 000 000 transaction  2 500 000  I-4  Small-scale mining permit Authorization 2 000 000 Renewal 2 500 000 transaction  5 000 000 

=== PAGE 52 ===
 52 
No. Item Amount in CFAF  I-5  Industrial mining permit Authorization 5 000 000 Renewal 10 000 000 transaction 15 000 000 II Quarry regime   II-1  Prospecting permit Authorization  500 000 renewal 1 000 000  II-2  Artisanal quarry Authorization 500 000 renewal 1 000 000  II-3  Public interest quarry Authorization  2 000 000 renewal  3 000 000  II-4  Industrial quarries Authorization 2 000 000 renewal 2 500 000 transaction 5 000 000 III Spring, mineral and thermo-mineral waters, as well as geothermal deposits regime    III-1   Spring, mineral and thermo-mineral waters, as well as geothermal deposits exploitation permit 
Authorization     
300 000 
 SECTION THIRTY-ONE: Conditions for collecting annual inspection and control charges  The provisions of Section 27 of Law No. 2022/020 of 27 December 2022: Finance Law of the Republic of Cameroon for the 2023 Financial Year are amended and supplemented as follows:  (2) The annual inspection and control charges for first-class establishments shall be calculated on the basis of the surface occupation of the said establishments and cumulatively by successive instalments according to the following parameters:     Surface area Rate  from 0 m2 to 10 m2 inclusive…… Flat rate:  CFAF 80 000  ………………….. …………………. ……………….… …………………. ………………….. …………………. …………………... ……………….... Above 1000 m2……. CFAF 240 per m2  

=== PAGE 53 ===
 53 
(5) Annual inspections and controls charges for classified establishments shall be borne by the operators of such establishments. They shall be paid solely at the Treasury.  Paragraph (2): Charges shall be instituted for the authorization and declaration to establish and operate classified establishments. The charges for classified establishments deemed at-risk shall be set as follows:   - 1st class establishments: CFAF 500 000; - 2nd class establishments: CFAF 200 000.  Paragraph (3): Natural or legal persons wishing to carry out the following operations in the area of classified establishments and at-risk devices shall be subjected to obtaining an authorization issued by the Minister in charge of classified establishments and at-risk devices:  - carrying out hazard assessments;  - assessing pressure devices;  - operating pollution control laboratories.  -  The charges for issuing the above authorizations shall be set as follows: - For natural persons: Item Amount in CFAF Authorization to carry out hazard assessments  250 000 Renewal of the authorization to carry out hazard assessments  400 000 Authorization to assess pressure devices 250 000 Renewal of the authorization to assess pressure devices 400 000 Authorization to operate pollution control laboratories 250 000 Renewal of the authorization to operate pollution control laboratories 400 000       - For legal persons  Item Amount in CFAF Authorization to carry out hazard assessments 500 000 Renewal of the authorization to carry out hazard assessments 800 000 Authorization to assess pressure devices 500 000 

=== PAGE 54 ===
 54 
Renewal of the authorization to assess pressure devices 800 000 Authorization to operate pollution control laboratories 500 000 Renewal of the authorization to operate pollution control laboratories 800 000  SECTION THIRTY-TWO: Provisions relating to non-tax revenue from the Small and Medium-sized Enterprises, Social Economy and Handicrafts sector  (1) Charges shall be instituted in the Small and Medium-sized Enterprises, Social Economy and Handicrafts sector as follows: - charges for registering on the SMEs National List;  - charges for studying applications for and renewal of licences issued to incubation entities;  - charges for obtaining the Social Economy unit status; - charges for the rental of shops, arts galleries, ad hoc or permanent events spaces in International arts Centres, regional arts villages and special arts villages. (2) Provisions relating to charges for registering on the National List of Small and Medium-sized Enterprises in Cameroon.  (a) Any legal person operating in the Small and Medium Enterprises sector as stipulated by Law No. 2010/003 of 13 April 2010 on the promotion of Small and Medium-sized Enterprises in Cameroon and subsequent amendments thereto and Order No. 090/CAB/PM of 29 October 2013 to organize the National Register of Small and Medium Enterprises in Cameroon shall be liable to payment of a fee for registration on the National List of Small and Medium-sized Enterprises in Cameroon. (b) The charges referred to in paragraph (a) above shall be set at FCFA 10 000.  (c) Registration on the National List of Small and Medium-sized Enterprises shall be renewed every 5 (five) years.  (3) Provisions relating to charges for applying for and renewing licences issued to incubation entities.  (a) Any private legal person applying for approval of a general or specialized private incubation entity shall be liable to payment of charges. (b) The charges referred to in paragraph (a) shall be set as follows:  - Review of the application for granting the licence: CFAF 100 000 - Review of the application for renewal: FCFA 50 000. (4) Provisions relating to charges for obtaining the Social Economy unit (SEU) status. (5)  

=== PAGE 55 ===
 55 
(a) Any Social Economy entity or enterprise seeking to be listed on the General Register of Social Economy Units shall be liable to payment of charges to obtain the Social Economy Unit status. (b) The charges referred to in paragraph (a) above shall be set as follows: - Registration: CFAF 10 000 - Renewal: CFAF 10 000. (6) Provisions relating to rental of international arts centres, regional arts villages and special arts villages.   The amounts for the rental of commercial space and events and ceremonial spaces at international arts centres, regional arts villages and special arts villages shall be set out in a separate instrument by the Minister in charge of handicraft.  SECTION THIRTY-THREE: Provisions relating to non-tax revenue from the Women’s Empowerment and the Family sector  (1) The following has been instituted in the women’s empowerment and the family sector:  - Charges for reviewing applications files for the issuance of a Letter of Agreement in principle, for the opening of nurseries and day care centres; - Charges for issuing an authorization to open and operate nurseries and/or day care centres; - Charges for renewing the authorization to open and operate nurseries and/or day care centres; - Fine for opening a nursery and/or day care centre without an authorization and fines for the suspension or withdrawal of authorization for failure to comply with the specifications.  (2) Provisions relating to costs for reviewing applications files for the issuance of a Letter of Agreement in principle, for the opening of nurseries and day care centres.  (a) Any promoter (natural or legal person) of an early childhood facility (nursery and/or day-care centre) must submit a file to obtain a letter of agreement in principle from the Minister of Women’s Empowerment and the Family.      (b) The charges referred to in paragraph (a) above shall be set as follows:   Amount (CFAF) No. Item  Legal person Natural person 1.  Application file review charges (agreement in principle) 200 000 150 000 

=== PAGE 56 ===
 56 
  Amount (CFAF) No. Item  Legal person Natural person 2.  Charges for issuing the order to open (authorization) 400 000 300000 3.  Renewal of authorization  250 000 150 000  (c) Fines for opening a nursery and/or day care centre without authorization and fines for suspension or withdrawal of authorization for failure to comply with the specifications shall be set as follows:  - Opening and/or operating without authorization: CFAF 300 000 - Failure to comply with specifications: Between CFA 100 000 and 300 000.  SECTION THIRTY-FOUR: Provisions relating to non-tax revenue from the Sports and Physical Education sector  (1) Non-tax revenue from the Sports and Physical Education sector shall comprise:  (a) tuition fees for the Bamenda, Bertoua, Dschang and Garoua National Youth and Sports Centres (CENAJES) and other training centres under the Ministry of in charge of sports and physical education;  (b) boarding fees of the Bamenda, Bertoua, Dschang and Garoua National Youth and Sports Centres (CENAJES) and other training Centres under the Ministry in charge of sports and physical education. (2) Provisions relating to tuition and boarding fees in the National Youth and Sports Centres (CENAJES) of Bamenda, Bertoua, Dschang and Garoua and other training centres under the Ministry in charge of sports and physical education:     (a) The following shall be liable to payment of the fees referred to in Paragraph (1) above: - any person admitted for training in CENAJES and the other Centres mentioned above;  - any student undergoing training in CENAJES and the other centres mentioned above, who wishes to live in the dormitories of these centres.  (b) The fees referred to in Paragraph (1) above shall be set as follows:  - civil servant (day student): CFAF 75 000 per year; - boarder: CFAF 200 000 per year; - armed forces and police student (FAP):  CFAF 200 000 per year; - Independent candidate: CFAF 200 000 per year; - Foreign student: CFAF 300 000 per year; (c) The fees referred to in Paragraph 1(b) above shall set at CFAF 100 000 per year. (3) All revenues collected by CENAJES and other training centres under the Ministry in charge of sports and physical education, in particular tuition and boarding fees, shall be fully allocated to the functioning of these entities. 

=== PAGE 57 ===
 57 
 SECTION THIRTY-FIVE: Provisions relating to non-tax revenues from the Territorial Administration sector  (1) The following has been instituted in the Territorial Administration sector: - Charges for reviewing application files for authorization to purchase a hunting weapon; - Charges for reviewing application files for authorization to purchase a traumatic weapon;   - Charges for reviewing application files for authorization to purchase a handgun; - Charges for authorization to acquire a traumatic weapon; - Charges for permit to carry a hunting weapon; - Charges for permit to carry a handgun; - Charges for authorization to transfer a hunting weapon; - Charges for authorization to transfer a traumatic weapon; - Charges for authorization to transfer a handgun; - Charges for reviewing applications for authorization to open a firearms shop; - Charges for authorization to open a firearms shop; - Charges for authorization to purchase ammunition for personal use; - Charges for authorization to purchase ammunitions for firearms shops; - Charges for entry and renewal of concession or authorization for gaming enterprises; - Annual royalty applicable to gaming enterprises under the concession and authorization regimes; - Charges for reviewing applications for authorization to operate a security company;  - Charges for authorization to operate a security company.  (2) Provisions relating to charges for authorization to purchase, carry and transfer weapons, to purchase ammunition and open a firearms shop  (a) The charges referred to in this paragraph shall be those relating to the authorization to purchase, carry and request for transfer of weapons, to purchase ammunition and open a firearms shop as provided for by Law No. 2016/015 of 14 December 2016 to lay down general weapons and ammunition regulations in Cameroon and Decree No. 73/658 of 22 October 1973 to regulate the import, sale, transfer, possession and carrying of firearms and ammunitions.  (b) Authorizations to carry firearms, purchase ammunition and open a firearms shop shall be valid for 5 (five) years. 

=== PAGE 58 ===
 58 
(c) Holders of an authorization to purchase ammunition, carry firearms and open a firearms shop issued more than 5 (five) years ago shall have 6 (six) months from the date of enactment of this law to comply. (d) The charges referred to in this paragraph shall be payable, as the case may be, upon submission of the application or upon collection of the authorization.   (e) The charges for the authorization to purchase, carry and transfer firearms and purchase ammunition and open a firearms shop shall be set as follows: No. Item  Proposed rate (CFAF) 1.  Charges for reviewing applications for authorization to purchase a hunting weapon  50 000 
2.  Charges for reviewing applications for authorization to purchase a traumatic weapon 100 000 
3.  Charges for reviewing applications for authorization to purchase a handgun 200 000 4.  Charges for authorization to acquire a traumatic weapon 150 000 5.  Charges for permit to carry a hunting weapon 50 000  6.  Charges for permit to carry a handgun 250 000 7.  Charges for authorization to transfer a hunting weapon 25 000 8.  Charges for authorization to transfer a traumatic weapon 100 000 9.  Charges for authorization to transfer a handgun 250 000 10.  Charges for reviewing applications for authorization to open a firearms shop 200 000   11.  Charges for authorization to open a firearms shop 200 000 12.  Charges for authorization to purchase ammunition for personal use  10 000 13.  Charges for authorization to purchase ammunitions for firearms shops 50 00  (3) Provisions relating to the annual royalty, charges for entry and renewal of gaming enterprises under the concession and authorization regimes.  (a) The charges and duties referred to in this paragraph shall be those for entry and renewal fee have been instituted for gaming companies under the concession and authorization regimes in accordance with Law No. 2015/012 of 16 July 2015 to lay down regulations governing entertainment games, money games and games of chance, and Decree No. 2019/PM of 18 July 2019 to specify conditions for implementation of the said law.  (b) The charges referred to in this paragraph shall be set as follows: - annual royalty: 2% of the annual pre-tax turnover of gaming enterprises subjected to the concession and authorization regimes; - charges for entry and renewal of a concession or authorization to operate a gaming enterprise set as follows: • Type A casinos: CFAF 10 000 000; 

=== PAGE 59 ===
 59 
• Type B casinos: CFAF 5 000 000; • Type C casinos: CFAF 2 000 000; • Type D casinos: CFAF 1 000 000; • Type A bet concessions: CFAF 10 000 000; • Type B bet concessions: CFAF 5 000 000; • On-line gaming: CFAF 300 000 000;  • Public lotteries: CFAF 10 000 000; • Commercial lotteries and raffles: 5% of the value of the prizes to be distributed. (3) Provisions relating to costs of reviewing applications for authorization to operate a security company, in accordance with Law No. 97/021 of 10 September 1997 relating to private security companies and Decree No. 2015/407 of 16 September 2015 to specify the conditions for implementation of the said Law.  (a) Existing security establishments and companies shall have 6 (six) months from the date of enactment of this Law to comply. (b) The charges referred to in paragraph (a) above shall be set as follows: - Charges for reviewing applications for authorization to operate a security company: CFAF 100 000;  - Charges for issuance of an authorization to operate a security company: CFAF 1 000 000 FCFA.      CHAPTER FOUR ALLOCATION OF REVENUE   DIVISION 1: SPECIAL APPOPRIATIONS ACCOUNTS  SECTION THIRTY-SIX: The ceiling of the special appropriations account for the support of cultural policy shall be set at CFAF two hundred million (200 000 000) for the year 2025.  SECTION THIRTY-SEVEN: The ceiling of the special appropriations account for the financing of water and sanitation sustainable development projects shall be set at CFAF nine hundred million (900 000 000) for the year 2025.  SECTION THIRTY-EIGHT: The ceiling of resources allocated to the Special Wildlife Protection Fund shall be set at CFAF five hundred million (500 000 000) for the 2025 financial year.  SECTION THIRTY-NINE: The ceiling for taxes to be paid into the Special Forestry Development Fund shall be set at CFAF three billion (3 000 000 000) for the 2025 financial year. SECTION FORTY: The ceiling for the National Environment and Sustainable Development Fund shall be set at CFAF one billion five hundred million (1 500 000 000) for the year 2025.  

=== PAGE 60 ===
 60 
SECTION FORTY-ONE: The ceiling of resources allocated to the special appropriation account for the development of the postal sector shall be set at CFAF nine hundred million (900 000 000) for the 2025 financial year.  SECTION FORTY-TWO: The ceiling of resources allocated to the Special Fund for Electronic Security Activities shall be at CFAF one billion five hundred million (1 500 000 000) for the 2025 fiscal year.  SECTION FORTY-THREE: The ceiling of the special appropriation account for the support and development of tourism and leisure activities shall be set at FCFA one billion (1 000 000 000) for the 2025 financial year.  SECTION FORTY-FOUR: The ceiling of the resources allocated to the special appropriation account for the production of secure transport documents shall be set at CFAF six billion (6 000 000 000) for the 2025 financial year.  SECTION FORTY-FIVE: The ceiling of resources allocated to the Electricity Sector Development Fund shall be set at CFAF fifteen billion (15 000 000 000) for the 2025 financial year.  SECTION FORTY-SIX: The ceiling of the resources allocated to the Fund for the Financing of the Reconstruction of the Economically Disadvantaged Areas of the Far North, North West and South West Regions shall be set at CFAF thirty-six billion four hundred million (36 400 000 000) for the 2025 financial year.  DIVISION 2: CEILING ON TAXES ALLOCATED TO PUBLIC BODIES  SECTION FORTY-SEVEN: The ceiling of contributions allocated to the Cameroon Housing Fund (CFC) shall be set at CFAF five billion (5 000 000 000) for the 2025 financial year.  SECTION FORTY-EIGHT: The ceiling of the Contribution to the National Employment Fund (CFNE) allocated to the National Employment Fund (NEF) shall be set at CFAF nine billion (9 000 000 000) for the 2025 financial year.  SECTION FORTY-NINE: The ceiling of the fees for the regulation of contracts allocated to the Public Contracts Regulatory Agency (ARMP) shall be set at CFAF eight billion (8 000 000 000) for the 2025 financial year.  SECTION FIFTY: The ceiling of the proceeds of the Special Tax on Petroleum Products (STPP), revenues from toll gates and weighing stations paid into the Road Fund shall be set at CFAF sixty billion (60 000 000 000) for the 2025 financial year.  SECTION FIFTY-ONE: The ceiling of royalties paid by autonomous port bodies to the National Port Authority (NPA) shall be set at CFAF five billion one hundred million (5 100 000 000) for the 2025 financial year.  SECTION FIFTY-TWO: The ceiling of revenue from vehicle stamp duties allocated to regional and local authorities shall be set at CFAF seven billion (7 000 000 000) for the 2025 financial year.  

=== PAGE 61 ===
 61 
SECTION FIFTY-THREE: The ceiling of the share of resources from the Contribution from the Cameroon Housing Fund and the Special Telecommunications Fund allocated to the Cameroon Investment Promotion Agency (CIPA) shall be set at CFAF six billion (6 000 000 000) for the 2025 fiscal year.  SECTION FIFTY-FOUR: The ceiling of the part of the licence royalty and that of the proceeds of fines allocated in accordance with Law No.2011/022 of 14 December 2011 governing the electricity sector to the Electricity Sector Regulatory Agency (ARSEL) shall be set at CFAF four billion five hundred million (4 500 000 000) for the 2025 financial year.  SECTION FIFTY-FIVE: The ceiling of the share of charges for entry and/or renewal of licence granted to providers of network and information system security services,  the share of penalties imposed,  the annual charge of 0.5% of the turnover of operators and managers of electronic communications networks,  the share of the charge for the use of addresses, prefixes and telephone numbers as well as the share from the charges for the use of radio frequencies allocated to the National Agency for Information and Communication Technologies (ANTIC) shall be set at CFAF seven billion five hundred million (7 500 000 000) for the 2025 financial year.  SECTION FIFTY-SIX:  The ceiling of the share of charges for entry and/or renewal of licence for activities in the telecommunications sector, the share of penalties instituted by the law governing electronic communications; the share of radio frequency usage charges, the share of fees for the use of addresses, prefixes and numbers or blocks of numbers and the annual royalty of 1.5% of the pre-tax turnover of network operators and service providers allocated to the Telecommunications Regulatory Agency (ART)  shall be set at CFAF eighteen billion five hundred million (18 500 000 000) for the 2025 financial year.  SECTION FIFTY-SEVEN: The ceiling of aeronautical royalties and the share of fines collected in implementation of the law governing civil aviation in Cameroon allocated to the Cameroon Civil Aviation Authority (CCAA) shall be set at CFAF eighteen billion million (18 000 000 000) for the 2025 financial year.  SECTION FIFTY-EIGHT: The ceiling of the share of the inspection tax from the Import Verification Programme (PVI) allocated to the National Agency for Standards and Quality (ANOR) shall be set at CFAF six billion five hundred million (6 500 000 000) for the 2025 financial year.  SECTION FIFTY-NINE: The ceiling of the share of the licence fee deducted from the turnover of operators in the electricity sector and the budget surpluses of the electricity sector regulator allocated to the Rural Electrification Agency (AER) shall be set at CFAF four billion (4 000 000 000) for 2025 financial year.  SECTION SIXTY: The ceiling of the share of royalties on the export of cocoa and coffee and the proceeds from fines resulting in particular from the export of poor-quality products allocated to the Cocoa and Coffee Sector Development Fund (FODECC) shall be set at CFAF eight billion (8 000 000 000) for the 2025 financial year.  

=== PAGE 62 ===
 62 
SECTION SIXTY-ONE: The ceiling of the share of the royalty on the export of cocoa and coffee allocated to the National Cocoa and Coffee Board (ONCC) shall be set at CFAF six billion (6 000 000 000) for the 2025 financial year.  SECTION SIXTY-TWO: The ceiling of the proceeds of annual contributions from professional shippers and royalties for the issue of Electronic Cargo Tracking Slips (ECTS) allocated to the National Shippers' Council of Cameroon (CNCC) shall be set at CFAF seven billion five hundred million (7 500 000 000) for the 2025 fiscal year.  SECTION SIXTY-THREE: The ceiling of the proceeds of veterinary health inspection taxes on international trade and other veterinary health inspection taxes allocated to the Maritime Fisheries Development Fund (CDPM) shall be set at CFA one billion five hundred million (1 500 000 000) for the 2025 financial year.  SECTION SIXTY-FOUR: The ceiling of revenue from the share of the health and veterinary inspection tax on imports, the share of the fee on exports of cocoa and coffee, and the share of additional consular fees allocated to the Chamber of Agriculture Fisheries Livestock and Forestry (CAPEF) shall be set at CFAF three billion (3 000 000 000) for the 2025 fiscal year.   SECTION SIXTY-FIVE: The ceiling of the revenue from the share of the health and veterinary inspection tax on imports and the share of the revenue from farm taxes and other veterinary health inspection taxes allocated to the North West Livestock Development Fund (CDENO) shall be set at CFAF one billion (1 000 000 000) for the 2025 financial year.  SECTION SIXTY-SIX: The ceiling of the revenue from the share of the health and veterinary import inspection tax and the share of the revenue from farm taxes and other veterinary health inspection taxes allocated to the North Livestock Development Fund (CDEN) shall be set at CFAF one billion (1 000 000 000) for the 2025 financial year.  PART THREE PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE BALANCE OF RESOURCES AND STATE BUDGET EXPENDITURE  SECTION SIXTY-SEVEN: The State budget for the 2025 financial year shall be balanced in terms of resources and uses at CFAF 7 317 700 000 000 including CFAF 7 250 800 000 000 for the general budget and CFAF 66 900 000 000 for the Special Appropriations Accounts.  CHAPTER ONE EVALUATION OF RESOURCES  SECTION SIXTY-EIGHT: The income and revenues applicable to the general budget of the Republic of Cameroon for the 2025 financial year shall be estimated at CFAF 7 250 800 000 000 and broken down by type of revenue as follows:  (Unit: million CFAF) ACCOUNTS HEADING 2024 2025 

=== PAGE 63 ===
 63 
(Unit: million CFAF) ACCOUNTS HEADING 2024 2025  A-REVENUES 5 235 100 5 548 100  PART I - TAX REVENUES  4 203 000 4 509 300 711 TAXES ON INCOME, PROFITS AND CAPITAL GAINS 972 010  991 250 712 TAXES ON SALARIES AND OTHER REMUNERATION 340 000 350 000 713 TAXES ON ASSETS 26 800 20 550 714 INTERNAL TAXES AND DUTIES ON GOODS AND SERVICES 2 207 169 2 408 059 715 TAXES ON FOREIGN TRADE AND INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS  529 336 579 186 716 OTHER TAXES ON GOODS AND SERVICES 14 485 20 525 719 OTHER TAX REVENUES  113 200 139 730  PART II - GRANTS, CONTRIBUTIONS AND LEGACIES 103 800 90 400 741 GRANTS FROM INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTIONS 52 600 45 810 742 GRANTS FROM FOREIGN PUBLIC ADMINISTRATIONS 51 200 44 590  PART III - SOCIAL CONTRIBUTIONS  58 007 71 885 725 SOCIAL SECURITY CONTRIBUTIONS  58 007 71 885  PART IV - OTHER REVENUE  870 293 876 515 721 INCOME FROM STATE PROPERTY AND ASSETS OTHER THAN INTEREST 702 313 717 960 722 ADMINISTRATIVE FEES AND CHARGES 44 795 36 881 723 FINES, PENALTIES AND FINANCIAL SANCTIONS 10 960 13 582 729 OTHER NON-TAX REVENUES  42 888 21 762 754 PROCEEDS FROM THE SALE OF FIXED ASSETS 294 421 759 OTHER EXCEPTIONAL INCOME 52 322 64 840 771 INTEREST ON LOANS AND OVERDRAFTS 57 1 043 772 INTEREST ON TERM DEPOSITS 842 332 774 INTEREST ON MARKETABLE SECURITIES 268 364 775 HOLDING GAINS ON FINANCIAL ASSETS 14 966 18 547 776 FOREIGN EXCHANGE GAINS 340 307 779 OTHER FINANCIAL INCOME  248 476  B - LOANS AND OTHER FINANCING 1 977 400 1 702 700 141 TREASURY BONDS 280 000 380 000 151 MULTILATERAL PROJECT LOANS 308 511 330 906 152 PROJECT LOANS FROM GOVERNMENTS AFFILIATED TO THE PARIS CLUB  8 964 9 615 153 INITIAL PROJECT LOANS FROM GOVERNMENTS NOT AFFILIATED TO THE PARIS CLUB 271 121 290 802 155 PROJECT LOANS FROM FOREIGN PRIVATE SECTOR ORGANIZATIONS 194 555 208 678 161 MULTILATERAL PROGRAMME LOANS 365 900 346 100 

=== PAGE 64 ===
 64 
(Unit: million CFAF) ACCOUNTS HEADING 2024 2025 162 INITIAL PROGRAMME LOANS FROM GOVERNMENTS AFFILIATED TO THE PARIS CLUB 26 000 - 175 OTHER INITIAL LOANS FROM EXTERNAL PRIVATE-SECTOR BODIES  467 000 - 512 BANK OF CENTRAL AFRICAN STATES  55 349 136 600 TOTAL RESOURCES OF THE GENERAL STATE (A+B) BUDGET 7 212 500 7 250 800  SECTION SIXTY-NINE: The resources of the Special Appropriations Accounts for the 2025 financial year shall be estimated at CFAF 66 900 000 000 and broken down as follows by type of revenue:  (Unit: Thousand CFAF)  DESCRIPTION OF THE REVENUE  2024 2025  ELECTRICITY SECTOR DEVELOPMENT FUND 15 000 000 000 15 000 000 000 1 Share of the water charges and water charges  3 000 000 000 3 000 000 000 2 Share of fines and penalties collected under Law No. 2011/022 of 14 December 2011 governing the electricity sector 1 000 000 000 1 000 000 000 3 The share of the State's dividends from its holdings in electricity sector companies as fixed by the State's finance law 500 000 000 500 000 000 4 The share of the entry or renewal fees of electricity sector operators  250 000 000 250 000 000 5 Share of proceeds from electricity sales from the Memve'ele hydroelectric plant 1 500 000 000 1 500 000 000 
6 Annual contributions from operators holding a concession or licence in the electricity sector, up to 1% of their annual turnover excluding taxes, the basis for calculating turnover being for producers for industrial purposes, exclusively limited to activity in the electricity sector 5 200 000 000 5 200 000 000 
7 Carry forward (balance to be carried forward) 3 550 000 000 3 550 000 000     SPECIAL FUND FOR FINANCING THE RECONSTRUCTION OF ECONOMICALLY DISADVANTAGED AREAS IN THE FAR NORTH, NORTH-WEST AND SOUTH-WEST REGIONS 35 000 000 000 36 400 000 000 1 World Bank 0 1 426 769 000 2 IsDB 8 673 550 000 6 873 550 000 3 JAPAN 2 000 000 000 2 000 000 000 4 Carry forward 9 326 450 000 1 109 9681000 5 Subsidy from the General Budget  15 000 000 000 15 000 000 000     POSTAL SECTOR DEVELOPMENT 900 000 000 900 000 000 1 Other levy on public and private operators to finance public service missions 564 994 553 445 075 000 2 Levies in respect of the exercise by private operators of licensed activities, in accordance with the provisions of the law governing postal activity 72 000 000 40 000 000 3 Carry forward (balance to carry forward) 263 005 447 414 925 000     SPECIAL ELECTRONIC SECURITY FUND 1 500 000 000 1 500 000 000 

=== PAGE 65 ===
 65 
 (Unit: Thousand CFAF)  DESCRIPTION OF THE REVENUE  2024 2025 
1 Annual contributions from accredited certification authorities, security auditors, publishers of security software, other authorized security service providers, editor’s security software and other approved security service providers, up to 1.5% of their turnover excluding tax 1 000 000 1 000 000 
2 A fee for the use of addresses, prefixes and telephone numbers 710 000 000 710 000 000 3 Carry forward (balance to carry forward) 789 000 000 789 000 000     CULTURAL POLICY SUPPORT 300 000 000 200 000 000 1 Contribution of services attached to the Ministry in charge of arts and culture 10 000 000 15 000 000 2 Contributions of collective management organizations to the promotion of cultural policy 50 000 000 40 000 000 3 Operating rights for cinematography-related activities 34 000 000 62 000 000 4 Cultural heritage operation dues 13 000 000 8 000 000 5 Dues arising from the activities of shows 30 000 000 20 000 000 6 Book and reading activities operation dues 3 000 000 3 000 000 7 Royalties paid for folklore representation or fixing  50 000 000 0 8 Remuneration for private copying of phonograms, videograms and printed works 100 000 000 20 000 000 9 Carry forward (balance to carry forward) 0 27 000 000 10 Income from the rental of cultural centres, venues and podium coaches  10 000 000 5 000 000     FINANCING OF WATER AND SANITATION SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS 900 000 000 900 000 000 1 Fines and transactions  50 000 000 50 000 000 2 Other unallocated revenue  20 000 000 50 000 000 3 Contributions from international donors and voluntary contributions 30 000 000 0 4 Share of the water charge 350 000 000 100 000 000 5 Water withdrawal fee  200 000 000 350 000 000 6 Carry forward (balance to carry forward) 100 000 000 100 000 000 7 Sanitation tax 150 000 000 250 000 000     NATIONAL FUND FOR ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT  1 500 000 000 1 500 000 000 1 Genetic resources access charges  6 000 000 10 000 000 2 AROE issuance charges 50 000 000 50 000 000 3 Charges for issuing waste traceability manifests 50 000 000 100 000 000 4 Technical visa fees  250 000 000 220 000 000 5 Charges for reviewing the approval files of Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and Environmental Audits firms 2 000 000 2 000 000 6 Environmental permit file review fees 35 000 000 35 000 000 7 Examination fees for Environmental and Social Impact Assessment reports and Environmental Audits 400 000 000 500 000 000 8 Charges for reviewing the terms of reference relating to Environmental and Social Impact Assessments and Environmental Audits 350 000 000 350 000 000 

=== PAGE 66 ===
 66 
 (Unit: Thousand CFAF)  DESCRIPTION OF THE REVENUE  2024 2025 9 Proceeds from transaction fines as provided for by the framework law on environmental management 57 000 000 133 000 000 10 Carry forward (balance to carry forward) 300 000 000 100 000 000     FORESTRY DEVELOPMENT 3 000 000 000 3 000 000 000 1 Authorizations to open outage parks 180 000 000 180 000 000 2 Timber Processor Quality Registration Certificates (CEQTB) 2 000 000 4 000 000 3 Timber Exporter Quality Registration Certificates (CEQEB) 40 000 000 40 000 000 4 Charges for the grant and renewal of Annual Exploitation Permits (PAO) 40 000 000 40 000 000 5 Charges for the grant and renewal of Annual Exploitation Certificates (CAO) 40 000 000 40 000 000 6 Charges for issuance of boundary demarcation certificates 20 000 000 30 000 000 7 Charges for issuance of the certificate of origin 35 000 000 35 000 000 8 Charges for issuance of the sampling plan compliance certificate 1 000 000 1 300 000 9 Development plan approval application fees 8 000 000 15 000 000 10 Approval grant application charges  1 000 000 2 025 000 11 Application charges for grant of sales of standing volumes 15 000 000 15 000 000 12 Cites permits 650 000 000 650 000 000 13 Special products operating permit 6 500 000 6 500 000 14 Share of revenue from fines. transactions. damages, public auctions or private auctions of seized products and objects 500 000 000 500 000 000 15 Carry forward (balance to carry forward) 803 500 000 523 700 000 16 Resources from the sale of secure documents resulting from the contribution of operators in accordance with regulatory provisions, the unit cost of which shall be FCFA 100 000 658 000 000 91 747 5000     SPECIAL FUND FOR WILDLIFE PROTECTION  500 000 000 500 000 000 1 Leasehold rights 100 000 000 70 000 000 2 Game farming and game ranching licence fees 1 000 000 500 000 3 Hunting guide licence fees 15 000 000 15 000 000 4 Wild animal capture licence fees 3 000 000 1 500 000 5 Small hunting licence fees 1 000 000 200 000 6 Scientific research permit fees 3 000 000 3 000 000 7 Hunting licence and permit fees  30 000 000 30 000 000 8 Protected areas access fees 20 000 000 10 000 000 9 Application fees for the grant of approvals to operate wildlife and protected areas 3 000 000 1 000 000 10 Application fees for the allocation of hunting areas  0 3 000 000 11 Charges for reviewing ZIC, ZICGC and Game-Farming Wildlife Inventory Survey Plans 3 000 000 2 100 000 12 Charges for reviewing Zic, ZICGC and Game-Farming Wildlife Inventory Reports 3 000 000 2 100 000 13 Costs of operating infrastructure and equipment in protected areas and zoological gardens 3 000 000 3 000 000 14 Charges for requesting a review of ZIC, ZICGC and Game-Farming Management Plans, Private Zoological Gardens 1 000 000 0 

=== PAGE 67 ===
 67 
 (Unit: Thousand CFAF)  DESCRIPTION OF THE REVENUE  2024 2025 15 Proceeds from fines, transaction, damages, public auctions or over-the-counter sales of seized products and miscellaneous items 50 000 000 30 000 000 16 Carry forward (balance to carry forward) 120 000 000 120 000 000 17 Resources for the sale of secure documents for the Transport of Wildlife products 10 000 000 5 500 000 18 Grants, contributions, donations and legacies from any natural or legal person 30 000 000 0 19 Slaughter Tax 100 000 000 200 000 000 20 Detention Tax 1 000 000 100 000 21 Operating Tax 3 000 000 3 000 000     PRODUCTION OF SECURE TRANSPORT DOCUMENTS 6 000 000 000 6 000 000 000 1 Inter-urban road transport terminal operator licence 1 500 000 1 500 000 2 Approval of travel manager in an inter-urban road transport terminal 1 500 000 1 500 000 3 Authorization of goods consolidator and deconsolidator  1 500 000 1 500 000 4 Approval of driving schools  1 500 000 1 500 000 5 Approvals for the professions of road transport operator and road transport auxiliary 60 000 000 60 000 000 6 Approvals for the professions of maritime and para-maritime transporters 100 000 000 100 000 000 7 Provisional authorizations 3 000 000 3 000 000 8 Public road transport cards (blue cards) 656 000 000 656 000 000 9 Certificates of competence 54 500 000 54 500 000 10 Motorboat capacity certificates 5 000 000 5 000 000 11 Tug capacity certificates 3 000 000 3 000 000 12 Vehicle registration certificates (grey cards) 3 000 000 000 3 000 000 000 13 Transport licences 100 000 000 100 000 000 14 Temporary maritime passbook 3 000 000 3 000 000 15 Professional maritime passbooks 2 500 000 2 500 000 16 Pleasure boat driving licence 2 000 000 2 000 000 17 National and international driving licence 1 300 000 000 1 300 000 000 18 Navigation permit 5 000 000 5 000 000 19 Carry forward (balance to carry forward) 500 000 000 500 000 000 20 Security inspections  200 000 000 200 000 000     TOURISM AND LEISURE ACTIVITY SUPPORT AND DEVELOPMENT 1 000 000 000 1 000 000 000 1 Fines and transactions 90 000 000 100 000 000 2 Concession of classified tourist sites to natural or legal persons 5 000 000 5 000 000 3 File fees for obtaining tourist concessions 10 000 000 5 000 000 4 Application for the construction, renewal, extension, approval, operation of tourism and leisure establishments 30 000 000 60 000 000 5 Rental of hotel establishments built with public capital and given under free management to national or foreign natural or legal persons 160 000 000 140 000 000 

=== PAGE 68 ===
 68 
 (Unit: Thousand CFAF)  DESCRIPTION OF THE REVENUE  2024 2025 6 Share of revenue from national parks and wildlife reserves access fees 5 000 000 5 000 000 7 Share of the proceeds of the tourist tax 600 000 000 600 000 000 8 Licence fee 40 000 000 55 000 000 9 Fee collected during the issuance of building permits and the opening of hotel establishments 20 000 000 30 000 000 10 Carry forward (balance to carry forward) 40 000 000 0     TOTAL REVENUES FROM SAAs 65 600 000 000 66 900 000 000  CHAPTER TWO EVALUATION OF STATE BUDGET EXPENDITURE  SECTION SEVENTY: The expenses of the general budget of the Republic of Cameroon for the 2025 financial year shall be evaluated at CFAF 7 250 800 000 000 and are broken down by economic category as follows:     (Unit: Thousand CFAF) CODE HEADING 2024 2025 CURRENT EXPENDITURES 5 608 430 000 5 383 210 000 Part 1 Debt financial charges  2 168 300 000   1 981 500 000 14 GOVERNMENT SECURITIES OF MORE THAN ONE YEAR 204 284 000 184 384 000 141 Treasury bonds 169 637 000 149 737 000 144 Accrued interest not yet due on government securities over one year 34 647 000 34647000 15 PROJECT LOANS 748 223 000 864 223 000 151 Multilateral project loans 110 978 000 110 978 000 152 Project loans from governments affiliated to the Paris Club 50 792 000 50 792 000 153 Initial project borrowings from governments not affiliated to the Paris Club 382 576 000 382 576 000 154 Interest accrued and not yet due on project loans 135 291 000 165 291 000 155 Project loans from external private bodies 68 586 000 154 586 000 17 Other Loans 1 077 693 000 766 693 000 174 Accrued and unmatured interest on other borrowings 12 062 000 12 062 000 176 Other initial borrowing from general government 89 191 000 270 391 000 177 Other initial borrowings from institutions and administrations 976 440 000 484 240 000 67 Debt financial expenses 138 100 000 166 200 000 671 Interest and financial expenses on debt 138 100 000 166 200 000 Part 2 Personnel expenditure 1 490 518 100 1 590 628 133 66 Personnel expenses 1 490 518 100 1 590 628 133 661 Gross salaries of personnel with special status in the public service 1 419 652 466 1 512 415 493 663 Gross salary of personnel with overall pay   5 223 358 6 534 735 

=== PAGE 69 ===
 69 
    (Unit: Thousand CFAF) CODE HEADING 2024 2025 665 Emoluments, bonuses and other allowances excluding salaries  86 762 86 089 666 Personnel remuneration other than pay 16 988 901 18 954 631 669 Other personnel expenditure  48 566 613 52 637 185 Part 3 Expenditure on goods and services 980 791 142 1 065 418 744 60 Purchase of goods 307 755 416 286 319 203 601 Materials, equipment and supplies 89 414 334 112 591 351 605 Water, electricity, gas and other energy sources 71 336 007 74 732 340 606 Specific equipment and supplies  147 005 076 115 469 882 61 Purchase of services 487 830 357 536 510 993 611 Transport and mission expenses 67 288 640 70 791 545 612 Rents 19 353 838 63 035 556 613 Fees and studies 38 837 039 43 909 917 614 Care and maintenance 25 177 267 27 467 292 615 Insurance 2 912 979 3 716 384 617 Public relations-communication Fees  60 894 030 63 477 707 618 Staff training costs 31 700 357 35 219 891 619 Other acquisitions of services 241 666 207 228 892 201 62 Other services (Refund of revenues received) 85 427 953 86 039 700 624 Taxes and internal taxes on goods and services 84 000 000 84 000 000 625 Taxes on foreign trade and international transactions 1 388 310 2 000 000 626 Other tax revenue 18 620 10 000 627 Non-tax revenue 21 023 29 700 69 Current expenditure breakdowns 99 777 416 144 298 120  690 Current expenditure breakdowns 99 777 416 144 298 120 Part 4 Transfer Expenditure 966 810 758 742 891 693 63 Subsidies 13 026 659 14 092 432 632 Subsidies to public enterprises 3 884 300 1 500 000 633 Subsidies to private enterprises 4 561 000 7 606 000 639 Subventions to other classes of recipients 4 581 359 4 986 432 64 Transfers 953 784 098 728 799 261 641 Transfers to national public establishments 172 060 189 261 605 257 642 Transfers to regional and local authorities 20 060 525 27 520 660 643 Transfers to other public administrations 309 000 309 000 644 Transfers to non-profit institutions   100 000 645 Transfers to households 268 657 200 20 419 403 646 Transfers to supranational authorities and contributions to international organizations 11 464 469 13 946 469 

=== PAGE 70 ===
 70 
    (Unit: Thousand CFAF) CODE HEADING 2024 2025 647 Transfers to other public budgets 51 544 011 57 211 000 648 Pensions of officials and other servants of the State 258 668 000 270 369 000 649 other transfers 171 020 704 77 300 472 Part 6 Other expenditure 2 010 000 2 010 000 65 Exceptional charges 2 010 000 2 010 000 659 Other exceptional expenses 2 010 000 2 010 000 CAPITAL EXPENDITURE 1 604 070 000 1 863 090 000 Part 1 Financial charges of the debt  84 000 000   10 FIXED ASSETS INTEGRATION OR COUNTERPART ACCOUNTS 84 000 000   101 Fixed assets integration accounts 84 000 000   Part 3 Expenditure on goods and services 27 149 955 90 072 022 61 Purchase of services 27 149 955 90 072 022 613 Fees and studies 27 149 955 90 072 022 Part 4 Transfer Expenditure 24 051 927 196 079 480 64 Transfers 24 051 927 196 079 480 641 Transfers to national public establishments 23 506 213 38 079 480 642 Transfers to regional and local authorities 285 714 157 490 000 643 Transfers to other public administrations 260 000 510 000 Part 5 Capital Expenditure 1 468 868 118 1 576 938 497 21 Intangible fixed assets 39 954 300 36 859 335 211 Research and development expenses 35 675 536 33 737 000 212 Patents, trademarks, copyrights 108 000 228 330 213 Organizational Systems Design - Software Packages 4 170 764 2 854 005 219 Other intangible assets   40 000 22 Unproduced capital assets 38 431 815 64 004 405 221 Land 31 284 626 60 014 405 223 Plantations and drills 850 817 210 000 224 Bodies of water 6 085 581 3 750 000  229 Other non-produced fixed assets 21 0791 30 000 23 Acquisitions, construction and major repairs of buildings 1 206 982 599 1 168 763 715 231 Administrative buildings for office use 59 437 967 48 715 863 232 Administrative buildings used for accommodation (civilian and military) 20 910 868 30 663 393  233 Administrative buildings for technical use 103 869 942 45 784 458 234 Books 371 948 546 397 378 752 235 Infrastructure 650 189 379 645 419 073 236 Computer Networks 625 897 802 136 

=== PAGE 71 ===
 71 
    (Unit: Thousand CFAF) CODE HEADING 2024 2025 24 Acquisitions and major repairs of equipment and furniture 134 747 219 219 639 695 241 Housing and office furniture and equipment 30 590 751 114 911 572 242 Office computer equipment 6 007 237 8 642 042 243 Transport equipment 15 722 758 15 479 110 244 Technical equipment and tools 81 505 773 67 786 971 245 Valuables - Collections - works of art 550 000   247 Strategic or emergency stocks 35 000 240 000 248 Equipment and furniture in progress 68 100 11 070 000 249 Other equipment and furniture 267 600 1 510 000 25 Military Equipment 23 752 185 27 671 347 250 Military buildings 4 398 676 7 146 260 251 Military bases 2 306 694 3 037 500 252 Military structures and infrastructure 10 829 388 10 785 321 253 Furniture, military materials and equipment 1 173 437 2 635 200 254 Police works and infrastructure 289 000   255 Police furniture, materials and equipment 304 500 60 000 256 Office Buildings 1 817 491 757 066 257 Works of Command   90 000 258 Current equipment of the armed forces and police forces 2 633 000 3 160 000 259 Other fixed assets of the armed forces and police   2 020 011 26 Equity investments, related receivables and guarantees 25 000 000 60 000 000 261 Indoor equity investments   50 000 000 262 External equity investments 25 000 000 10 000 000  MARGIN 10 000 000 TOTAL EXPENDITURE 7 212 500 000 7 250 800 000  SECTION SEVENTY-ONE: The expenditures of the special appropriations accounts for the 2025 financial year shall be evaluated at CFAF 66 900 000 000 and shall be broken down by type of expenditure as follows:  CODE HEADING 2024 2025 CURRENT EXPENDITURE 15 875 130 15 913 362 2 Personnel expenditure 1 309 000 1 760 000 66 Personnel expenses 1 309 000 1 760 000 661 Gross salaries of personnel with special status in the public service 500 000 650 000 663 Gross salary of personnel with overall pay 225 000 0 664 Gross salaries of personnel excluding status 39 000 50 000 

=== PAGE 72 ===
 72 
CODE HEADING 2024 2025 CURRENT EXPENDITURE 15 875 130 15 913 362 669 Other personnel expenditure 545 000 1 060 000 3 Expenditure on Goods and Services 12 831 130 12 809 262 60 Purchase of Goods 8 326 134 8 487 232 601 Materials, equipment and supplies 1 119 500 1 444 153 605 Water, electricity, gas and other sources of energy 711 630 772 752 606 Specific equipment and supplies 6 495 004 6 270 327 61 Purchase of Services 4 504 996 4 307 030 611 Transport and mission expenses 1 201 496 1 148 776 612 Rent 86 000 58 000 613 Fees and studies 418 000 319 504 614 Care and maintenance  145 000 154 500 615 Insurance 140 000 80 000 617 Public relations-communication costs 1 061 500 1 155 250 618 Staff training costs 1 266 500 1 285 500 619 Other acquisitions of services 186 500 105 500 62 Other Services (Reimbursement of income collected) 0 15 000 627 Non-tax revenue 0 15 000 4 Transfer Expenditure 1 735 000 1 344 100 63 Subsidies 40 000 50 000 639 Subsidies to other categories of beneficiaries 40 000 50 000 64 Transfers 1 695 000 1 294 100 641 Transfers to national public establishments 300 000 185 000 644 Transfers to non-profit institutions 1 325 000 450 000 645 Transfers to households 0 500 000 646 Transfers to supranational authorities and contributions to international organizations 70 000 159 100 CAPITAL EXPENDITURE 49 724 870 50 986 638 3 Expenditure on Goods and Services 5 468 099 2 990 837 60 Purchases of Goods 90 000 95 000 601 Materials, equipment and supplies 10 000 95 000 606 Specific equipment and supplies  80000 0 61 Purchase of Services 5 378 099 2 895 837 613 Fees and studies 5 363 099 2 839 837 617 Public relations-communication costs 0 28 000 

=== PAGE 73 ===
 73 
CODE HEADING 2024 2025 CURRENT EXPENDITURE 15 875 130 15 913 362 618 Staff training costs 10 000 28 000 619 Other acquisitions of services 5 000 0 4 Transfer Expenditure 1 559 699 1 024 699 64 Transfers 1 559 699 1 024 699 641 Transfers to national public establishments 211 000 65 000 642 Transfers to decentralized local authorities 321 000 235 000 645 Transfers to households 1 015 699 709 699 646 Transfers to supranational authorities and contributions to international organizations 12 000 15 000 5 Capital Expenditure 42 697 071 46 971 102 21 Intangible Fixed Assets 560 000 707 647 211 Research and development expenses 10 000 10 000 212 Patents, trademarks, copyrights 305 000 442 647 213 Organizational Systems Design - Software Packages 245 000 255 000 22 Unproduced capital assets 346 846 962 025 221 Land 120 000 777 025 223 Plantations and drills 200 846 155 000 224 Bodies of water 26 000 30 000 23 Acquisitions, construction and major repairs of buildings 23 634 368 25 023 493 231 Administrative buildings for office use 1 192 908 1 270 509 232 Administrative buildings used for accommodation (civilian and military) 26 423 402 390 233 Administrative buildings for technical use 10 946 555 10 696 997 234 works 7 530 732 7 010 546 235 Infrastructure 3 937 750 5 643 051 24 Acquisitions and major repairs of equipment and furniture 18 115 857 20 252 937 241 Housing and office furniture and equipment 13 921 221 15 373 010 242 Office computer equipment 654 000 687 353 243 Transport equipment 942 000 796 075 244 Technical equipment and tools 2 598 636 3 396 499 25 Military Equipment 40 000 25 000 256 Office Buildings 0 18 000 259 Other fixed assets of the armed Forces and police 40 000 7 000 TOTAL EXPENDITURE OF SAAs 65 600 000 66 900 000  

=== PAGE 74 ===
 74 
CHAPTER THREE BUDGET BALANCE  SECTION SEVENTY-TWO: For the 2025 fiscal year, the balance of the State budget resulting from the assessment of revenue and the setting of expenditure ceilings presented in sections  68, 69,70 and 71 above shall be fixed at the following amounts:    (in billion CFAF) REVENUE AMOUNT  EXPENDITURE AMOUNT I. GENERAL BUDGET  A-DOMESTIC REVENUE  5 548.1 
  
CURRENT EXPENDITURES (part 2, 3, 4, and 6) 3 913.4     Gross tax revenue  4 361.8 Gross interests and commissions  378.2 Including VAT credit refunds  84.0 Foreign debt interest relief 0.0 Net tax revenue  4 277.8 Personnel expenditure 1 586.6     Oil revenue 734.8 Goods and services 1 027.7     Including studies and project management related to the investment 17.9     Non-tax revenue 361.1 Current transfers  920.8   Overall net domestic revenues  5 373.7 Including capital transfers to LRAs and PEs 195.0 Including subsidies paid to CASs. 15.0 DONATIONS  90.4 CAPITAL EXPENDITURES (Part 5) 1650.2      Programme grants  49.8 External financing  758.4      Project donations  40.6 Own resources  876.8 EXCEPTIONAL INCOME 0.0 Shareholding/Restructuring 15.0     Privatization revenues    OTHER EXPENDITURE  0.0 Deductions from revenue to fund the special national solidarity fund for the fight against the coronavirus 0.0     Net loans 0.0 NET REVENUE GENERAL BUDGET  5464.1 EXPENDITURE GENERAL BUDGET 5563.6 SPECIAL TREASURY ACCOUNTS  Special appropriation accounts 56.8 
  
Special appropriation accounts 66.9 Including Far north, North West and South West Special Reconstruction Fund 28.1 Including Far north, North West and South West Special Reconstruction Fund 36.4 Including government subsidies  15.0     Japan Assistance Fund 2.0     Other special purpose allocation accounts 30.5 Other special purpose allocation accounts 30.5 TOTAL NET BUDGETARY REVENUE   5 507.7 TOTAL STATE BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 5 615.5   III – BALANCES    Amount   % of GDP    FINANCING CAPACITY/REQUIREMENT -107.8   -0.3   OVERALL, BALANCE -107.8   -0.3   CEMAC REFERENCE BALANCE  -33.1   -0.1     

=== PAGE 75 ===
 75 
CHAPTER FOUR OVERALL FINANCING AND ACCREDITATION  SECTION SEVENTY-THREE:  For the 2025 fiscal year, the cash resources and expenses contributing to the achievement of financial equilibrium shall be assessed as follows:  FINANCING AND CASH REQUIREMENT  AMOUNT FINANCING AND CASH RESOURCES  AMOUNT Overall budgetary deficit: 107.8 -Project loans 840.0 Amortization of structured debt 1 375.7 Issuance of government securities  380.0 External debt  729.0 EFP budgetary support   165.0 Domestic debt 646.7 Bank financing  220.6 Outstanding treasury/unstructured debt CAA  207.5      VAT escrow account         84.0 Refunds of VAT credits 84 Exceptional financing 189.4   IMF budget support (ECF) 56.0 Net cash outflow to correspondents  20.0  WB budget support (PforR-PRSEC) 76.3     ADB budget support (PARSEC)  48.8     BJD funding (reconstruction SAA) 8.3 TOTAL 1 795.0 TOTAL 1 795.0  SECTION SEVENTY-FOUR: During the 2025 fiscal year, the minister in charge of finance shall be authorized to carry out active debt and cash management, in particular through the repurchase, exchange or early redemption of securities issued and the use of risk hedging instruments.  SECTION SEVENTY-FIVE: During the 2025 financial year, Government shall be authorized to resort to domestic borrowing, in particular by issuing government securities, to finance development projects, up to a maximum amount of CFAF 380 billion.  SECTION SEVENTY-SIX: (1) Government shall be authorized to negotiate and possibly conclude during the 2025 financial year, on terms that safeguard the State's financial interests as well as its economic and political sovereignty, external loans on project loans amounting to CFAF 950 billion.  (3) In current value, this external debt ceiling shall stand at FCFA 700 billion.  DIVISION TWO: PUBLIC POLICY RESOURCES AND SPECIAL PROVISIONS  PART ONE GENERAL PROVISIONS  SECTION SEVENTY-SEVEN: This part shall provide for and authorize the means of public policies devoted to all ministries and institutions for the 2025 financial year.   

=== PAGE 76 ===
 76 
PART TWO APPROPRIATIONS  CHAPTER ONE GENERAL BUDGET APPROPRIATIONS  SECTION SEVENTY-EIGHT: Amounts of commitment authorizations and payment appropriations under the general budget opened for the programmes contributing to achieving the objectives with indicators shall be as follows:  N° Programme OBJECTIVE INDICATOR CA PA CODE HEADING  HEAD  01 - PRESIDENCY OF THE REPUBLIC 60 723 000 60 723 000 1 168 FORMULATION AND COORDINATION OF PRESIDENTIAL ACTION 
Contribute to the achievement of the objectives set by the programme of major achievements 
Achievement rate of actions approved by the President of the Republic 
23 690 610 23 690 610 
2 
169 PRESIDENTIAL PROTECTION AND TERRITORIAL INTEGRITY Preserve the integrity of the national territory and political stability Overall level of achievement of the objectives assigned to the missions 
8 118 493 8 118 493 
3 170 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE PRESIDENCY OF THE REPUBLIC AND ITS ATTACHED SERVICES 
Improve the coordination of services and ensure the proper implementation of programmes 
Overall rate of achievement of budgeted activities 
28 913 897 28 913 897 
 HEAD  02 - SERVICES ATTACHED TO THE PRESIDENCY 11 829 000 11 829 000 4 
171 FORMULATION AND COORDINATION OF PRESIDENTIAL ACTION 
Contribute to the achievement of the objectives set by the programme of major achievements 
Achievement rate of actions approved by the President of the Republic 
1 322 728 1 322 728 
5 
172 PRESIDENTIAL PROTECTION AND TERRITORIAL INTEGRITY 
Contribute to the preservation of the integrity of the national territory and political stability 
Overall level of achievement of the objectives assigned to the missions 
10 506 272 10 506 272 
 HEAD  03 - NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 24 622 000 24 622 000 6 
174  STRENGTHENING PARLIAMENTARY CONTROL OVER GOVERNMENT ACTION Contribute to the effectiveness of public services Rate of control of Government’s priority investment programmes 6 140 000 6 140 000 
7 175 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE  NATIONAL ASSEMBLY Strengthen the national legislative framework  
Contribution rate of the NA to strengthening the national legislative framework  18 482 000 18 482 000 

=== PAGE 77 ===
 77 
 HEAD  04 - PRIME MINISTER'S OFFICE 24 395 111 27 389 000 8 
010 MANAGEMENT AND COORDINATION OF GOVERNMENT ACTION 
The overall objective of the “Management and Coordination of Government Action” programme is to improve the administrative, economic and financial governance of public policies with a view to ensuring the structural transformation of the economy, development of human capital and well-being, and promotion of employment and economic integration, in keeping with the NDS30 
Rate of timely responsiveness  
5 128 380 5 128 380 
9 
011 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO INTERNAL SERVICES AND SERVICES ATTACHED TO THE PRIME MINISTER'S OFFICE 
Improve operational coordination of services and ensure proper implementation of programs at the PM’s Office 
Rate of implementation of budgeted activities within the PM’s Office 
15 249 689 18 243 578 
10 
204 STRATEGIC AND POLICY COORDINATION Optimize the strategic and policy coordination of Government action  
Proportion of events supervised by the Prime Minister contributing to economic influence out of all events contributing to economic influence 
4 017 042 4 017 042 
  HEAD  05 -  ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL 1 391 000 2 191 000 11 
095 ADVISE THE EXECUTVE ON ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, CULTURAL AND ENVIRONNEMENTAL ISSUES 
Strengthen the participation of the various socio-professional categories in the elaboration and implementation of public policies. 
Number of opinions issued by the ESC 80 000 80 000 
12 
096 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL 
Improve the coordination of services and ensure the proper implementation of the programmes of the ESC 
Rate of completion of activities budgeted within the ESC 1 311 000 2 111 000 
  HEAD  06 -  MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS 4 813 9000 48 139 000 13 
087 BEEFING UP BILATERAL RELATION POTENTIALS  
harness, for the benefit of Cameroon, the fallouts of bilateral cooperation in view of its diplomatic emergence 
1.Number of legal instruments of bilateral cooperation, not finalized;   2.Number of legal instruments of bilateral cooperation, finalized  3.Number of friendly ties established and partners mobilized and number of projects initiated 
23 884 074 23 884 074 

=== PAGE 78 ===
 78 
14 
088 
NEGOTIATION, CO-ORDINATION AND FOLLOW-UP OF MULTILATERAL, DECENTRALISED, NON-GOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION AND SUBSEQUENT PROGRAMMES 
Diversify and step up opportunities accruing from multilateral, decentralized and non-governmental forms of cooperation for the development of Cameroon  
1.Number of agreements, projects, programs and mechanisms obtained and implemented through multilateral, decentralized and non-governmental cooperation  2.Number of projects and programs obtained and/or implemented by MINREX for the benefit of Cameroon within the framework of multilateral, decentralized and non-governmental cooperation 
4 470 284 4 470 284 
15 
089 MANAGEMENT OF THE DIASPORA, MIGRANTS AND EMERGING CRISES 
Step up the participation of Cameroonians abroad in the development of Cameroon and contribute to the management of emerging crises 
1.Number of migrant returnees or re-integrated in families  2.number of annual projects/or initiatives of Cameroonians abroad already supported  3.Number of mechanisms striving effectively towards managing migratory issues to which Cameroon is a party 
6 146 882 6 146 882 
16 
090 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE EXTERNAL RELATIONS SUB-SECTOR 
Improve on the coordination of services and ensure the smooth implementation of Programmes in MINREX 
Rate of implementation of budgeted activities within MINREX the  13 637 759 13 637 759 
  HEAD  07 -  MINISTRY OF TERRITORIAL ADMINISTRATION 43 665 000 42 510 000 17 
161 TERRITORIAL ADMINISTRATION Consolidate the presence of administrative authorities in the territory 
1. Proportion of periodic reports sent by administrative authorities in the course of the year 6 759 436 6 759 436 
18 
162 CONTRIBUTION TO THE PROMOTION OF CIVIL LIBERTIES AND THE SECURITY OF PEOPLE AND PROPERTY 
Ensure compliance with regulations on individual and collective freedoms 2.Proportion of civil society organizations monitored per year  2 068 753 2 068 753 
19 163 DEVELOPMENT OF THE NATIONAL CIVIL PROTECTION SYSTEM Build disaster resilience Number of divisions with Emergency Organization (ORSEC)Plans  2 385 000 2 385 000 
20 164 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE TERRITORIAL ADMINISTRATION SUB-SECTOR 
Ensure the optimal implementation of the Ministry's Programmes 
Rate of implementation of budgeted activities in the Ministry  32 451 811 31 296 811 

=== PAGE 79 ===
 79 
  HEAD  08 -  MINISTRY OF JUSTICE 88 377 782 74 808 000 21 
050 IMPROVEMENT OF COURT ACTIVITY Improve the quality and equal access to the public service of justice  
1.Proportion of cases handled within a reasonable time limit    2.Coverage rate of Courts of First Instance  3.Proportion of Magistrates with surplus workload 
49 602 066 36 032 284 
22 051 IMPROVEMENT OF PENITENTIARY POLICY Improve detention conditions and promote the social reintegration of detainees 
1.Proportion of detainees trained for reintegration 25 722 895 25 722 895 
23 
052 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE   JUSTICE SUB-SECTOR 
Ensure the effectiveness and efficiency of services for the optimal implementation of Programmes in the Ministry of Justice 
Implementation rate of budgeted activities in the Ministry of Justice 13 052 821 13 052 821 
  HEAD  09 -  SUPREME COURT 4 330 871 5 807 000 24 
114 
MONITORING THE FINANCIAL TRANSPARENCY OF BUDGETARY MANAGEMENT AND THE QUALITY OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
Strengthen the control and judgment of public accounts  Rate of judicial review carried out  1 058 041 1 058 041 
25 115 MANAGEMENT OF JUDICIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE DISPUTES 
Improve performance of the Supreme Court in judicial and administrative matters  
Rate of decisions rendered in judicial and administrative matters  455 249 455 249 26 188 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE SUPREME COURT Ensure optimal implementation of CS Programmes  Achievement rate of budgeted activities in the Supreme Court  2 817 581 4 293 710   HEAD  10 -  MINISTRY OF PUBLIC  CONTRACTS 17 014 400 16 790 000 27 027 PUBLIC CONTRACTS SYSTEM ADMINISTRATION Ensure the proper functioning of the public contracts system 
Proportion of contracts awarded through the mutual agreement procedure 2 310 100 2 310 100 
28 028 PROGRAMMING AND MONITORING OF PUBLIC CONTRACTS Ensure the programming and proper award of public contracts  Proportion of programmed contracts executed 2 109 490 2 109 490 29 029 EXTERNAL CONTROL OF PUBLIC CONTRACT EXECUTION  Ensure the quality of services provided 
Proportion of contracts having been executed in compliance with technical specifications 1 787 976 1 787 976 
30 030 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE PUBLIC CONTRACTS SUB-SECTOR Improve service performance Rate of financed activities achieved 10 806 834 10 582 434 
  HEAD  11 -  SUPREME STATE AUDIT OFFICE  9 615 877 6 600 000 31 
067 STRENGTHENING THE PREVENTION OF MISAPPROPRIATION OF PUBLIC FUNDS 
Promote the culture of good governance in the management of public affairs 
Number of public administrations and other State entities with internalized internal control standards and measures to prevent damage to public funds 
886 000 886 000 

=== PAGE 80 ===
 80 
32 
076 CONTROL, AUDITS AND SANCTIONS 
Sanction  unscrupulous managers,  repair damages endured by the State, follow up sanctions pronounced by CDBF 
1.Number of entities controlled and audited  2.Proportion of cases examined by the CDBF per year 
2 226 250 2 226 250 
33 077 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO CONSUPE Ensure the effective implementation of CONSUPE programmes Rate of completion of budgeted activities  6 503 627 3 487 750 
  HEAD  12 -  GENERAL DELEGATION OF NATIONAL SECURITY 122 096 000 122 096 000 34 062 STRENGTHENING PUBLIC SECURITY Increase the protection of institutions, public liberties, people and properties 
Security coverage rate of the national territory 9 967 287 9 967 287 
35 063 STRENGTHENING BORDER SECURITY Increasing border security Proportion of criminal acts and cross-border offences brought under control 6 488 547 6 488 547 36 064 REVITALISING THE INTELLIGENCE SYSTEM Provide the authorities with the information they need to make decisions Number of security reports produced 7 030 388 7 030 388 37 065 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO DGNS 
Improve the coordination of services and ensure the sound implementation of programmes 
Implementation rate of activities included in DGNS budget 98 609 778 98 609 778 
  HEAD  13 -  MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 365 696 381 364 860 000 38 001 DEFEND NATIONAL TERRITORY INTEGRITY Enhance territorial defence measures Completion rate of manpower and general staffing tables for the armed forces  
169 058 969 168 556 443 
39 003 PARTICIPATE IN THE PROTECTION OF PERSONS, PROPERTY AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
Provide conditions for peace and security that promote development Crime rate 88 780 559 88 805 663 
40 004 ASSISTANCE, RECONVERSION AND REINTEGRATION OF EX-SERVICEMEN AND WAR VICTIMS 
Improve the follow-up, reconversion and reintegration of ex-servicemen and war victims 
Number of ex-servicemen and war victims  or their successors taken care of or assisted  
41 656 514 41 656 514 
41 005 CONTRIBUTE TO NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT EFFORTS 
Provide support in specific areas contributing to the socio-economic development of Cameroon 
Compliance rate of the various requests to the specialized structures of MINDEF 
9 657 441 9 657 441 
42 006 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE DEFENCE SUB-SECTOR 
Improve service coordination and ensure the proper implementation of MINDEF programmes 
Execution rate of budgeted activities in the Ministry of Defence 
56 542 898 56 183 939 
  HEAD  14 -  MINISTRY OF ARTS AND CULTURE 10 846 300 9 429 000 43 148 CONSERVATION OF CAMEROONIAN ART AND CULTURE Rebuild and safeguard cultural and artistic heritage. Number of viable and operational cultural properties and elements   1 658 000 1 658 000 44 
149 DEVELOPMENT AND VALORISATION OF THE PRODUCTION OF CULTURAL PROPERTIES AND SERVICES 
Promote the emergence of a structured commercial, cultural sector that is competitive and that generates sustainable income and jobs. 
Proportion of actions carried out to promote the production and consumption of cultural properties and services 
5 636 800 4 219 500 
45 182 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE ARTS AND Ensure the optimal implementation of Ministry programmes. Rate of completion of budgeted activities in MINAC 3 551 500 3 551 500 

=== PAGE 81 ===
 81 
CULTURE SUB-SECTOR 
  HEAD  15 -  MINISTRY OF BASIC EDUCATION 313 614 000 313 614 000 46 101 PRE-SCHOOL DEVELOPMENT Increase pre-school offer across the national territory Gross pre-school enrolment rate 30 883 070 30 883 070 47 102 UNIVERSALISATION OF PRIMARY EDUCATION Improve  access to and completion of quality and inclusive primary education for all school-age children 
1.Primary school completion rate  2.Primary school net admission rate 234 476 493 234 476 493 
48 103 LITERACY Increase the percentage of literate population in CAF, CEBNF and CPLN 
percentage of the literate population in CAFs, CEBNFs and CPLNs 4 695 027 4 695 027 49 104 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT  TO THE BASIC EDUCATION SUB-SECTOR 
Maximize the effective implementation of operational programmes 
Average rate of achievement of operational programme indicators 43 559 410 43 559 410 
  HEAD  16 -  MINISTRY OF SPORTS AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION 31 086 000 31 086 000 50 007 DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICAL EDUCATION DEVELOPMENT 
To increase the healthy, methodical and supervised practice of Physical and Sports Activities  Number of practitioners per year 8 597 500 8 597 500 
51 008 DEPARTMENT OF STANDARDS AND MONITORING OF SPORTS ORGANISATIONS 
To Improve the performance of sports federations at the national level 
Number of sports federations eligible for international competitions  
14 460 000 14 460 000 
52 009 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE SPORTS AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION SUB-SECTOR 
To improve the coordination of services and ensure proper implementation of programmes  
Achievement rate of budgeted activities in the Ministry 
8 028 500 8 028 500 
  HEAD  17 -  MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATION 7 284 000 7 284 000 53 013 INCREASING PEOPLE'S ACCESS TO MEDIA CONTENT 
Qualitatively and quantitatively increase national news coverage by public and privately owned media Coverage rate  1 578 000 1 578 000 
54 
097 DEVELOPMENT OF MULTISECTORAL COMMUNICATION FOCUSED ON SOCIETAL PERFORMANCE 
 Increase the availability of institutionalized information for people’s access to basic social services as well as the availability of the said information to the public concerned 
Percentage of the population aware of the use of basic social services to improve on their living conditions 
2 369 750 2 369 750 
55 
160 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO  THE COMMUNICATION SUB-SECTOR 
Improve the coordination of services and ensure the proper implementation of programmes in the Ministry of Communication 
Achievement rate of budgeted activities in the Ministry of Communication 
3 336 250 3 336 250 
  HEAD  18 -  MINISTRY OF HIGHER EDUCATION 136 668 000 136 668 000 56 116 DEVELOPMENT OF THE TECHNOLOGICAL AND PROFESSIONAL COMPONENTS OF HIGHER EDUCATION. 
Increase the quantity and quality of students trained in technological and professional Higher Education Institutions 
Percentage of students trained in technological and professional Higher Education Institutions 
17 146 380 17 146 380 

=== PAGE 82 ===
 82 
57 
117 MODERNIZATION AND PROFESSIONALIZATION OF FACULTIES 
Provide professional skills and competences to students in faculties to enable them find employment or be self-employed 
1.Annual student-teacher ratio for Master's level students  2.Rate of professional integration of students who have undergone training in faculties  3.Number of students per seat 
11 025 081 11 025 081 
58 
118 DEVELOPMENT OF UNIVERSITY RESEARCH AND INNOVATION 
Enable university research to have a positive impact on the country's development with a view to its emergence 
Number of university research results exploited in the priority sectors defined in the development strategy per year. 
26 569 824 26 569 824 
58 119 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE HIGHER EDUCATION SUB-SECTOR 
 improve the coordination of services and ensure proper implementation of programmes in higher education 
Implementation rate of budgeted activities 81 776 715 81 776 715 
  HEAD  19 -  MINISTRY OF SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH AND INNOVATION 29 906 000 29 906 000 60 136 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE  RESEARCH AND INNOVATION SUB-SECTOR 
Improve coordination, functioning and performance of the Research and Innovation sub-sector 
Implementation rate of ministerial action plan 8 194 800 8 194 800 
61 193 DENSIFICATION OF RESEARCH - DEVELOPMENT AND INNOVATION 
Increase the performance of scientific, technological and innovation research 
Number of research results produced and disseminated 21 711 200 21 711 200 
  HEAD  20 -  MINISTRY OF FINANCE 96 715 000 96 715 000 62 031 MOBILIZATION OF INTERNAL NON-OIL REVENUES Improve non-oil revenue collection and the business climate Internal tax revenue collection rate 19 100 246 19 100 246 
63 
032 CUSTOMS GOVERNANCE, PROTECTION OF THE ECONOMIC SPACE AND PARTICIPATION IN NATIONAL SECURITY 
Facilitate external trade and contribute to national security 
1.Interception rate of strategic goods in circulation in Cameroon  2.Dematerialisation rate of customs revenue  
13 738 648 13 738 648 
64 
033 TREASURY MANAGEMENT AND FINANCIAL SECTOR MONITORING Improve the efficiency of the Treasury and optimize the financing of the economy. 
1.Average payment duration of expenditure after assumption of responsibility by the Treasury services.  2.Annual increase rate of loans to the economy as a percentage of GDP. 
18 578 268 18 578 268 
65 034 STATE BUDGETARY MANAGEMENT Ensure proper drafting of Finance Bills and efficient execution of public entity budgets  
1.Average time taken to process expenditure claims  2.Level of respect for budget appointments 
22 903 525 22 903 525 
66 092 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT Ensure the optimal implementation of the Ministry’s Programmes Implementation rate of budgeted activities in the Ministry 
22 394 314 22 394 314 

=== PAGE 83 ===
 83 
  HEAD  21 -  MINISTRY OF COMMERCE  11 561 000 11 361 000 67 015 SUPPORT TO EXPORTS DEVELOPMENT 
Contribute to improving the competitiveness of “made in Cameroon” products on export markets 
Share of products marketed abroad in the total number of products subject to MINCOMMERCE supervision 
652 412 652 412 
68 021 DOMESTIC MARKET REGULATION Ensure regular domestic market supplies in a context of healthy competition Consumer product price index 5 497 124 5 497 124 
69 025 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT 
Improve the coordination of services and ensure the proper implementation of programmes 
Rate of implementation of budgeted activities  
4 641 376 4 441 376 
70 152 PROMOTION OF METROLOGY, MONITORING OF STANDARDS AND SUPERVISION OF THE FAIR-PRICE FRAMEWORK 
Guarantee fairness in commercial activities Level of fairness in commercial transactions 
770 088 770 088 
  HEAD  22 -  MINISTRY OF ECONOMY, PLANNING AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT 152 132 000 152 132 000 
71 
019 ENHANCEMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PLANNING AND INTENSIFICATION OF REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
Ensure the implementation of NDS30, foster harmonious and sustainable development of the territory and contribute to the fight against poverty  
Rate of execution of regional development programmes and projects 
58 170 273 58 170 273 
72 022 SUPPORT TO STRUCTURAL TRANSFORMATION FOR ACCELERATED GROWTH 
Contribute to structural transformation for growth acceleration  1.DGP physical implementation rate 66 644 335 66 644 335 
73 
023 STRENGTHENING DEVELOPMENT PARTNERSHIP AND REGIONAL INTEGRATION 
Improve alignment of the contributions of economic partnerships and regional integration to the achievement of Cameroon's development 
Annual ratio of external financing mobilized in accordance with the terms and conditions set by the Finance Law. 
17 144 191 17 144 191 
74 024 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE ECONOMY, PLANNING AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT SUB-SECTOR 
Improve coordination of services and provide assistance for the execution of operational programmes 
Completion rate of budgeted activities in MINEPAT 10 173 201 10 173 201 
  HEAD  23 -  MINISTRY OF TOURISM AND LEISURE 9 894 000 9 309 000 75 014 PROMOTION OF TOURISM AND LEISURE Attract international and domestic visitors Number of international visitors 1 594 150 1 594 150 76 150 DIVERSIFICATION AND STRENGTHENING OF THE TOURISM AND LEISURE OFFER Increase the offer of tourism and leisure products and services   4 423 575 4 063 575 77 151 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE TOURISM AND LEISURE SUB-SECTOR 
Improve the coordination of services and ensure the proper implementation of programmes 
Achievement rate of programmed and budgeted activities 3 876 275 3 651 275 
  HEAD  25 -  MINISTRY OF SECONDARY EDUCATION 584 166 000 584 166 000 78 105 STRENGTHENING ACCESS TO SECONDARY EDUCATION Increase access to secondary education Transition rate from primary to secondary school (including girls and boys) 134 038 800 134 038 800 

=== PAGE 84 ===
 84 
79 106 IMPROVEMENT OF THE QUALITY OF EDUCATION AND SCHOOL LIFE IN THE SECONDARY EDUCATION SUB-SECTOR 
Improve the quality of teaching and learning in the Ministry of Secondary Education Completion rate of first and second cycle 285 327 000 285 327 000 
80 107 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT IN SECONDARY EDUCATION Improve governance and optimize resource management  Implementation rate of programmed activities at MINESEC 52 727 200 52 727 200 81 112 ENHANCING PROFESSIONALISATION AND OPTIMISING TRAINING IN SECONDARY EDUCATION 
Increase the vocational skills of technical and vocational secondary school learners 
Percentage of learners by gender in the promising sectors 112 073 000 112 073 000 
  HEAD  26 -  MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND CIVIC EDUCATION 30 007 000 30 007 000 82 
144 CIVIC EDUCATION AND VOLUNTEERING Instill civic, moral and ethical values in people 
1.Proportion of the population having acquired civic behaviour  2.Instil civic, moral and ethical values in people 
8 483 999 8 483 999 
83 145 YOUTH SOCIO-ECONOMIC INTEGRATION Increase the economic integration of young people supervised by MINJEC structures 
Rate of economic integration of young people trained in MINJEC supervision structures 10 417 555 10 417 555 
84 
146 NATIONAL INTEGRATION AND CIVIC PARTICIPATION Reinforce republican values among the population 
1.Number of people trained on republican values (living together and participation in development)  2.Rate of economic integration of young people trained in MINJEC's supervision structures 
5 306 922 5 306 922 
85 
147 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND  CIVIC EDUCATION 
Improve on the coordination of services and ensure proper implementation of programmes 
Rate of completion of budgeted activities in the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Civic Education 5 798 524 5 798 524 
  HEAD  27 -  MINISTRY OF DECENTRALIZATION AND LOCAL DEVELOPMENT 126 165 000 126 165 000 86 
098 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE DECENTRALIZATION AND LOCAL DEVELOPMENT SUB-SECTOR 
Ensure optimal implementation of MINDDEVEL’s Programmes Execution rate of budgeted activities in the ministry 4 154 820 4 154 820 
87 099 EXPANDING THE DECENTRALIZATION PROCESS Strengthen the administrative and financial autonomy of RLAs 
Number of councils whose financial resources have increased by at least 5% per year 29 891 680 29 891 680 
88 100 PROMOTION OF LOCAL DEVELOPMENT To promote the contribution of RLAs to economic growth and local development 
Physical and financial execution rate of investment projects in RLAs 92 118 500 92 118 500 

=== PAGE 85 ===
 85 
  HEAD  28 -  MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, NATURE PROTECTION AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 11 880 000 11 880 000 
89 
002 CLIMATE CHANGE, DESERTIFICATION AND DROUGHT 
Reduce the vulnerability of people's development activities to the adverse effects of  climate change, desertification and drought 
1.Level of adaptation and resilience of development sectors to climate change 
5 647 000 5 647 000 
90 069 BIODIVERSITY Monitor and promote the conservation, sustainable use, restoration and enhancement of biodiversity 
Evolution of the state of ecosystems, species and genetic resources of biodiversity 1 853 000 1 853 000 
91 
091 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
Promote the consideration of sustainable development in projects and programmes in Cameroon 
1.Number of development projects and programmes that integrates environmental issues in their drafting and implementation 
894 000 894 000 
92 093 POLLUTION, NUISANCES AND HARMFUL AND/OR HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS Reduce environmental pollution and nuisances 
1.Amount of hazardous waste managed in an environmentally sound manner 1 291 000 1 291 000 
93 
094 
GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE ENVIRONMENT, NATURE PROTECTION AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT SUB-SECTOR 
Ensure the optimal implementation of the Programmes of the Environment, Nature Protection and Sustainable Development sub-sector 
Implementation rate of budgeted activities at MINEPDED 2 195 000 2 195 000 
  HEAD  29 -  MINISTRY OF MINES,   INDUSTRY AND TECHNOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT 13 154 000 13 154 000 94 035 IMPROVED KNOWLEDGE OF THE GEOLOGICAL POTENTIAL AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF MINERAL RESOURCES Develop the mining and quarrying sector 
1.knowledge level on geological potential  2.proportion of mineral reserves exploited 2 734 000 2 734 000 
95 036 DEVELOPMENT AND STRENTHENING OF THE INDUSTRIAL FABRIC 
Process agricultural, mining and forestry raw materials by developing industrial sectors Local processing rate of raw material 3 932 500 3 932 500 
96 037 MODERNISATION OF QUALITY INFRASTRUCTURE Improve the technical competitiveness of the local industry Quality infrastructure development index 838 500 838 500 97 
038 DEVELOPMENT OF TECHNOLOGIES AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY ASSETS 
Promote the development of technologies and the valuation of industrial property assets 
1.Proportion of local technologies exploited  2.Number of industrial property assets valued 
952 400 952 400 
98 
039 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE MINING, INDUSTRY AND TECHNOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT SUBSECTOR 
Improve the coordination of services and ensure the proper implementation of MINMIDT programmes 
Achievement rate of budgeted activities in MINMIDT 4 696 600 4 696 600 
  HEAD  30 -  MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT 106 574 210 106 574 210 
99 184 PRODUCTIVITY AND PRODUCTION OF AGRICULTURALS SECTORS 
Increase the annual production of major agricultural value chains. Agricultural production growth rate 23 940 024 23 940 024 

=== PAGE 86 ===
 86 
100 
185 SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION SYSTEMS AND FOOD SECURITY 
Improve the sustainable use of arable land and reduce food insecurity 
1.Proportion of producers who have adopted climate change adaptation and mitigation measures  2.Proportion of national population affected by food insecurity 
16 336 000 16 336 000 
101 186 DEVELOPMENT OF AGRICULTURAL, RURAL INFRASTRUCTURES AND AGRICULTURAL MECHANIZATION 
Improve access to production infrastructure and agricultural equipment in rural areas 
2.Proportion of councils with a new rural mini-infrastructure per year 
33 278 530 33 278 530 
102 187 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE AGRICULTURAL AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT SUB-SECTOR 
ensure the proper implementation of programmes in the Ministry of Agricultural and Rural development 
 Rate  of  achievement  of  budgeted  activities  within  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Rural Development 
33 019 656 33 019 656 
  HEAD  31 -  MINISTRY OF LIVESTOCK, FISHERIES AND ANIMAL INDUSTRIES 52 984 000 52 984 000 
103 053 DEVELOPMENT OF ANIMAL PRODUCTION AND INDUSTRIES Ensure an increase in the production of foods of animal origin Growth rate of animal product and food production in meat equivalent 
23 109 076 23 109 076 
104 
055 ENHANCEMENT OF LIVESTOCK  HEALTH COVERAGE AND FIGHT  AGAINST ZOONOSES 
Protect livestock from animal diseases and enhance the sanitary quality of foodstuffs from animal and fishery origin. 
Proportion of priority animal and zoonotic disease outbreaks successfully sanitized or controlled in relation to the number of reported and confirmed outbreaks 
5 533 181 5 533 181 
105 057 DEVELOPMENT OF FISHERY PRODUCTIONS Ensure a growing and sustainable production of fishery products Increase rate of the fishery product quantity 15 814 075 15 814 075 
106 
059 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE LIVESTOCK, FISHERIES AND ANIMAL INDUSTRY SUB SECTOR 
Improve coordination of services and ensure proper implementation of programmes in the Ministry of Livestock, Fisheries and Animal Industries (MINEPIA) 
Implementation rate of budgeted activities in the Ministry of Livestock, Fisheries and Animal Industries (MINEPIA) 
8 527 667 8 527 667 
  HEAD  32 -  MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES AND ENERGY 493 358 500 493 358 500 107 
016 ENERGY SUPPLY Have sufficient energy available for the population and economic activities 
1.Power available (MW)  2.Load factor of installed capacity   3.Volume of petroleum products, gas and biofuels available  
202 138 774 202 138 774 
108 
137 ACCESS TO ENERGY Increase access to energy for households and industries  
1.Coverage rate of national consumption estimates for petroleum products  2. Access rate to electricity (%)               
146 482 372 146 482 372 

=== PAGE 87 ===
 87 
109 
138 ACCESS TO DRINKING WATER AND LIQUID SANITATION 
Improve access to drinking water and liquid sanitation for households and economic operators  
1.Drinking water coverage rate (in %)  2.Volume of water mobilized  3. Access rate to improved autonomous sanitation infrastructure 
62 274 020 62 274 020 
110 139 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE WATER AND ENERGY SUB-SECTOR 
Improve the coordination of services and ensure the smooth running of programmes Completion rate of budgeted activities 82 463 334 82 463 334 
  HEAD  33 -  MINISTRY OF FORESTRY AND WILDLIFE 22 054 000 22 054 000 111 054 MANAGEMENT AND RENEWAL OF FORESTRY RESOURCES Ensure sustainable forest management 
1.Surface area of managed forests  2.Income generated by the management of forests    
5 277 450 5 277 450 
112 
056 SECURING AND ENHANCEMENT OF WILDLIFE RESOURCES AND PROTECTED AREAS 
Ensure sustainable management and enhancement of wildlife and protected areas  
1.Number of protected areas under management  2.Resources generated from the management of wildlife and protected areas  
3 142 442 3 142 442 
113 
058 ENHANCEMENT OF TIMBER AND NON-TIMBER FOREST RESOURCES Optimize the use of timber and non-timber resources 
1.Volume of legal timber marketed  2.Quantity of fuel-wood and non-timber forest products marketed   3.Number of direct jobs in the timber and non-timber forest products industries  
2 329 400 2 329 400 
114 
060 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE FORESTRY AND WILDLIFE SUB-SECTOR 
Further build and improve institutional, technical and operational capacities of development stakeholders of the forestry and wildlife sub-sector 
Efficiency rate in the implementation of sub-sector activities 
11 304 708 11 304 708 
  HEAD  35 -  MINISTRY OF EMPLOYMENT AND VOCATIONAL TRAINING 33 134 500 33 120 000 115 120 PROMOTION OF DECENT EMPLOYMENT AND OCCUPATIONAL INTEGRATION 
Promote decent employment through the expansion and enhancement of job creation opportunities in the economy 
Number of jobs created and identified through MINEFOP's employment promotion initiatives 4 461 050 4 461 050 
116 
121 SKILLS DEVELOPMENT 
Develop the skills of people seeking vocational qualifications or retraining in line with the needs of the economic  
Number of graduates from public and private VTCs with a professional title issued by  MINEFOP 18 828 479 18 814 479 
117 122 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE EMPLOYMENT AND VOCATIONAL TRAINING SUB SECTOR 
Ensure consistency and efficiency of MINEFOP activities Performance rate of budgeted activities  9 844 971 9 844 471 

=== PAGE 88 ===
 88 
  HEAD  36 -  MINISTRY OF PUBLIC WORKS 757 967 991 638 576 500 118 125 CONSTRUCTION OF ROADS AND OTHERS INFRASTRUCTURE Develop and modernize road and crossing infrastructure Density of paved roads per 1,000 inhabitants 457 358 069 375 581 585 
119 126 REHABILITATION, MAINTENANCE AND SERVICING OF ROADS AND OTHER INFRASTRUCTURES 
Restore and improve the asphalt and earth network Linear of the rehabilitated asphalt network 
237 949 426 200 334 419 
120 127 REALIZATION OF TECHNICAL INFRASTRUCTURE STUDIES 
Improve the quality of studies in order to optimize the cost and quality of infrastructure works 
% studies carried out on time and respecting the technical specifications 
2 912 284 2 912 284 
121 128 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT Rationalize and harmonize interventions in order to achieve the expected results Achievement rate of budget activities 59 748 212 59 748 212 
  HEAD  37 -  MINISTRY OF STATE PROPERTY, SURVEYS AND LAND TENURE 25 168 000 25 168 000 122 026 MODERNISATION OF LAND REGISTRATION SYSTEM Have a digital land registry capable of meeting the challenges of modern land governance 
Proportion of councils with a digital land registry plan 1 567 500 1 567 500 
123 061 PROTECTION AND DEVELOPMENT OF STATE PROPERTY Improve the management of state property Proportion of rehabilitated buildings 12 591 987 12 591 987 124 066 PROTECTION AND VALORISATION OF STATE LANDS 
Make available land reserves to contribute to the development of agro-industry, infrastructure, and social housing. 
Proportion of hectares of land secured and incorporated into the private State land 3 214 658 3 214 658 
125 068 OPTIMISING THE MANAGEMENT OF LAND TENURE Improve on the management of land tenure Average time to obtain land certificate and ownership certificate   1 721 500 1 721 500 126 075 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE STATE PROPERTY, SURVEYS AND LAND TENURE SUB-SECTOR 
Improve on the coordination of services and ensure the smooth implementation of programmes 
Implementation rate of activities budgeted in MINDCAF 6 072 355 6 072 355 
  HEAD  38 -  MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT  157 754 966 157 754 966 127 108 HOUSING DEVELOPMENT Improve access to decent housing. Proportion of households living in decent housing 45 201 313 45 201 313 
128 
109 ENHANCEMENT OF THE URBAN SOCIAL MILIEU 
Provide the urban sub-sector and RLAs with appropriate urban management tools or instruments and promote social inclusion in urban areas 
Proportion of municipalities whose management is based on appropriate urban governance tools 
1 785 887 1 785 887 
129 111 DEVELOPMENT OF TRANSPORT AND SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY INFRASTRUCTURE Improve mobility conditions in cities Length of roads constructed 103 332 953 103 332 953 
130 113 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE URBAN SUB-SECTOR 
Ensure the effective implementation of MINHDU programmes.   Achievement rate of programme budget activities 7 434 813 7 434 813 
  HEAD  39 -  MINISTRY OF SMALL AND MEDIUM-SIZED ENTERPRISES,SOCIAL ECONOMY AND HANDICRAFT 16 488 740 16 488 740 

=== PAGE 89 ===
 89 
131 
043 PROMOTING ENTREPRENEURSHIP Increase the number of viable SMESEH created as well as social economy and handicraft units 
1.Percentage of SMEs, social economy and handicraft units created   2.Growth rate of SMEs, social economy and handicraft units and enterprises whose creation was supported 
3 796 089 3 796 089 
132 
044 TRANSFORMATION AND MODERNISATION OF PRODUCTION UNITS Increase the output of SMESEH in the secondary sector 
1.Growth rate of SMESEHs transformed and/or modernized  2.Percentage of transformed and/or modernized SMESEH 
6 726 640 6 726 640 
133 
167 
GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE SMALL AND MEDIUM-SIZED ENTERPRISES, SOCIAL ECONOMY AND HANDICRAFT SUB-SECTOR 
Ensure optimal implementation of the Ministry's programmes Achievement rate of budgeted activities in the Ministry 5 966 011 5 966 011 
  HEAD  40 -  MINISTRY OF PUBLIC HEALTH 292 597 772 297 199 000 134 
045 DISEASE PREVENTION Reduce premature mortality due to preventable diseases through prevention 
1.Proportion of HIV-infected pregnant women on antiretroviral therapy   2.Vaccination coverage  3.Percentage of Long-Acting Insecticide-Impregnated Mosquito Net (LLIN) distributed among those planned  
58 254 620 58 254 620 
135 046 HEALTH PROMOTION AND NUTRITION Encourage populations to adopt healthy behaviours 1.Chronic malnutrition rate in children below 5 years of age 5 412 790 5 412 790 136 
047 STRENGTHENING THE HEALTH CARE SYSTEM 
Increase the institutional capacity of health structures to ensure sustainable and equitable access of populations to quality health care and services 
1.Rate of people covered by a social health protection system 125 504 857 130 106 085 
137 048 CASE MANAGEMENT Reduce overall mortality and lethality in community health facilities  
1.Infant mortality rate  2.Maternal mortality rate 
51 531 852 51 531 852 
138 
049 GOVERNANCE AND STRATEGIC STEERING OF THE HEALTH SYSTEM 
Improve the coordination of services and the effective implementation of programmes in the Ministry 
Implementation rate of  programme budget activities  51 893 653 51 893 653 
  HEAD  41 -  MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND SOCIAL SECURITY 7 900 000 7 900 000 139 017 PROMOTION OF SOCIAL SECURITY FOR ALL Improve social security coverage in Cameroon Percentage of active occupied population covered for at least three (3) hazards 1 018 000 1 018 000 

=== PAGE 90 ===
 90 
140 018 PROMOTING DECENT WORK Improve health and security mechanisms in workplaces 
Percentage of workers per sex whose companies comply with decent work principles 3 113 787 3 113 787 
141 
159 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE LABOUR AND SOCIAL SECURITY SUB-SECTOR 
Improve service coordination and ensure appropriate implementation of programmes in the Ministry of Labour and Social Security 
Execution rate of budgeted activities in MINTSS 3 768 213 3 768 213 
  HEAD  42 -  MINISTRY OF SOCIAL AFFAIRS 25 325 000 25 325 000 142 070 SOCIAL PROTECTION OF THE CHILD Ensure that child protection services are provided in an inclusive    and adequate manner 
Percentage of children, girls and boys, receiving quality social services 
2 881 400 2 881 400 
143 
071 NATIONAL SOLIDARITY AND SOCIAL PROTECTION OF SPECIFIC VULNERABLE GROUPS 
Increase the provision of social protection services to groups and communities based on their specific vulnerabilities, particularly in the most disadvantaged areas 
Proportion of access of SVPs to basic social services (per type of area and by gender) 
16 889 250 16 889 250 
144 179 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE SOCIAL AFFAIRS SUB-SECTOR Ensure optimal implementation of MINAS programmes Achievement rate of budgeted activities in MINAS 5 554 350 5 554 350 
  HEAD  43 -  MINISTRY OF WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND THE FAMILY 10 782 000 10 782 000 
145 
140 WOMEN’S ECONOMIC EMPOWERMENT Strengthen women’s economic power 
1.Proportion of women economically empowered by MINPROFF  2.Women's activity rate 
3 340 180 3 340 180 
146 
141 WOMEN’S SOCIAL EMPOWERMENT AND PROMOTION OF GENDER Improve the status and situation of women 
1.Nomber of women who are victims of discriminations  2.Number of Gender -Based Violence cases identified  3.Rate of women’s representation in positions of responsibility 
1 765 200 1 765 200 
147 
142 FAMILY DEVELOPMENT AND PROTECTION OF  CHILD RIGHTS  Strengthen the social role of the family and the protection of children’s rights 
1.Number of children registered at the civil status with the support of MINPROFF  2.Proportion of settled cases of violence out of reported cases  3.Proportion of non-divorced couples compared with those awaiting divorce 
1 969 700 1 969 700 
148 143 INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT AND GOVERNANCE Strengthen governance and institutional capacities Achievement rate of budgeted activities 3 706 920 3 706 920   HEAD  45 -  MINISTRY OF POSTS AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS 18 611 000 18 611 000 149 129 NETWORK DENSIFICATION AND IMPROVEMENT OF THE NATIONAL POSTAL Increase access to the national postal network Proportion of postal outlets with an internet connection 1 388 063 1 388 063 

=== PAGE 91 ===
 91 
COVERAGE 
150 130 DEVELOPMENT OF THE NATIONAL DIGITAL ECOSYSTEM increase digital accessibility and promote its use ICT’s development index (IDI) 10 330 875 10 330 875 151 131 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE MINISTRY OF POSTS AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
Ensure the optimal implementation of the Ministry's programmes Completion rate of budgeted activities in the Ministry 5 855 018 5 855 018 
152 132 SECURING THE NATIONAL DIGITAL ECOSYSTEM Guarantee the security of the national cyberspace National Cybersecurity Index. 1 037 044 1 037 044   HEAD  46 -  MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT 57 056 000 57 056 000 153 153 DEVELOPMENT OF ROAD TRANSPORT, INTERMODALITY AND ROAD SAFETY Improve urban transport service offers Rate of accident reduction 1 558 000 1 558 000 154 154 DEVELOPMENT OF AIR TRANSPORT AND CIVIL AVIATION REGULATION Improve air service offer, civil aviation security and safety Rate of freight traffic increase 913 500 913 500 155 155 DEVELOPMENT OF MARITIME, RIVER, LAKE TRANSPORT AND PORT ACTIVITIES 
Increase service offer of sea, river and lake transport as well as port activities Port passage deadlines 37 082 035 37 082 035 156 156 DEVELOPMENT OF RAIL TRANSPORT Improve rail transport service offer Assessment rate of freight traffic 11 400 500 11 400 500 157 
157 
DEVELOPMENT AND MODERNIZATION OF SYSTEMS FOR COLLECTION, PRODUCTION AND POPULARIZATION OF WEATHER INFORMATION 
Improve the production and popularization of meteorological information Weather reports production rate 1 100 195 1 100 195 
158 158 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE TRANSPORT SUB SECTOR Ensure the implementation of MINT programmes Execution rate of budgeted activities in the Ministry of Transport 5 001 770 5 001 770 
  HEAD  48 -  NATIONAL COMMITEE FOR DISARMAMENT, DEMOBILIZATION AND REINTEGRATION 4 412 000 4 412 000 159 
082 DESARMAMENT OF COMBATANTS AND DEMOBILIZATION 
Increase the surrender of Boko Haram and armed groups in the North West and South West regions   
Number of combatants who voluntarily lay down their arms, are integrated into the regional centres each year 
814 000 814 000 
160 083 REINTEGRATION OF EX-COMBATANTS 
Improve the holistic conversion (social, economic, cultural, religious, etc.) and reintegration of ex-combatants  
Number of ex-combatants empowered  813 000 813 000 
161 
180 
GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE NATIONAL  DISARMAMENT, DEMOBILIZATION AND REINTEGRATION COMMITTEE 
Improve coordination of services and ensure effective implementation of  programmes  
Rate of implementation of budgeted activities in the Commission  2 785 000 2 785 000 
  HEAD  49 -  CONSTITUTIONAL COUNCIL 4 144 000 4 144 000 162 074 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE CONSTITUTIONAL COUNCIL 
Ensure the operationalization and coordination of services of the Constitutional Council 
Achievement rate of budgeted activities within the CC 4 144 000 4 144 000 
  HEAD  50 -  MINISTRY OF PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATIVE REFORM 17 152 450 18 715 000 

=== PAGE 92 ===
 92 
163 
040 IMPROVING THE MANAGEMENT OF STATE HUMAN RESOURCES Optimize the management of State human resources   
1.Number of ministries equipped and using State human resource management tools  2.Proportion of State agents whose careers are up to date 
3 689 568 5 467 803 
164 041 MODERNISATION OF PUBLIC SERVICES Contribute to improving the performance of public services Proportion of public services with reform tools and projects 4 094 405 4 094 405 165 042 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO  MINFOPRA Ensure proper implementation of MINFOPRA programmes Execution rate of budgeted activities in MINFOPRA 9 368 477 9 152 792 
  HEAD  51 -  ELECTIONS CAMEROON 13 216 800 12 583 000 166 081 ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT OF THE ELECTORAL AND REFERENDUM PROCESS IN CAMEROON Boost the credibility of polls 2.Rate of electoral process contention (pre- and post-election) 4 162 000 4 162 000 
167 183 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO ELECAM  
Improve the coordination of services and ensure effective implementation of programmes 
Execution rate of budgeted activities at ELECAM 9 054 800 8 421 000 
  HEAD  52 -  CAMEROON HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION 4 796 000 4 796 000 168 084 PROMOTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS Enhance the culture of human rights in Cameroon Number of requests addressed to the CDHC  419 400 419 400 169 
085 PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS Fight against impunity and promote access to reparation for victims 
Number of allegations of human rights violations and proportion of those actually responded to (clarified or closed) by the CHRC 
437 200 437 200 
170 086 PREVENTION OF TORTURE Reduce the use of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment 
Number of visits to places of detention by the National Mechanism for the Prevention of Torture 478 700 478 700 
171 190 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE HRF SUB-SECTOR Ensure maximum implementation of programmes Implementation rate of budgeted activities 3 460 700 3 460 700 
  HEAD  53 -  SENATE 16 162 000 16 162 000 172 178 GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE SENATE Ensure the optimal implementation of SENATE Programmes Achievement rate of budgeted activities in the SENATE 16 162 000 16 162 000 
  HEAD  54 -  NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR THE PROMOTION OF BILINGUALISM AND MULTICULTURALISM 3 498 000 3 498 000 173 
181 
GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT TO THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR THE PROMOTION OF BILINGUALISM AND MULTICULTURALISM 
Ensure the optimal implementation of NCPBM programmes Implementation rate of budgeted activities at the NCPBM 3 498 000 3 498 000 
  HEAD  55 -  PENSIONS 270 369 000 270 369 000 174 200 PENSIONS Ensure the payment of retirement dues Payment rate  270 369 000 270 369 000 

=== PAGE 93 ===
 93 
  HEAD  56 -  EXTERNAL PUBLIC DEBT 941 000 000 941 000 000 175 199 REIMBURSEMENT OF EXTERNAL PUBLIC DEBT Respect State commitments towards funding bodies Payment rate  941 000 000 941 000 000   HEAD  57 -  INTERNAL PUBLIC DEBT 1 124 500 000 1 124 500 000 176 203 Reimbursement of domestic public debt Respect State commitments towards residents Payment rate 1 124 500 000 1 124 500 000 
  HEAD  60 -  STATE SUBSIDIES AND CONTRIBUTIONS 175 705 000 175 705 000 177 202 SUBSIDIES AND CONTRIBUTIONS Contribute to the proper functioning of bodies and public establishments Expected realization rate of contributions 175 705 000 175 705 000 
  HEAD  65 -  COMMON EXPENDITURE 218 682 000 218 682 000 178 201 RECURRENT COMMON EXPENDITURE Cover State unallocated operating expenditure Coverage rate of unallocated operating expenditure 
218 682 000 218 682 000 
  HEAD  92 -  PARTICIPATIONS 10 000 000 10 000 000 179 198 STATE PARTICIPATION IN SEMI-PUBLIC AND PRIVATE ENTERPRISES Cover State equity investments Coverage rate of expected State investments 10 000 000 10 000 000   HEAD  93 -  REHABILITATION/RESTRUCTURING 5 000 000 5 000 000 180 196 REHABILITATION AND RESTRUCTURING OF STATE OWNED ENTREPRISES Rehabilitate and restructure State-owned companies Proportion of companies restructured or rehabilitated 5 000 000 5 000 000 
  HEAD  94 -  INVESTMENT OPERATIONS 100 042 084 100 042 084 181 195 INVESTMENT OPERATIONS Cover State unallocated operating expenditure Coverage rate of unallocated operating expenditure 100 042 084 100 042 084 
  HEAD  95 -  CARRY-OVER 7 000 000 7 000 000 182 197 ASSUMPTION OF CARRY-OVER APPROPRIATIONS Continue implementing projects for which budget implementation is not completed by 2023 
Consumption rate of carry-over appropriations 7 000 000 7 000 000 
TOTAL 2025 7 380 409 735 7 380 409 735   SECTION SEVENTY-NINE: The expenditure and charges of the general budget shall be broken down by head and by type of expenditure as follows: (Million CFAF) HEAD RB PIB TOTAL 2024 2025 2024 2025 2024 2025 01 PRESIDENCY OF THE REPUBLIC 46 481 51 723 9 000 9 000 55 481 60 723 02 SERVICES ATTACHED TO THE PRESIDENCY 6 462 8 529 1 600 3 300 8 062 11 829 03 NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 18 482 18 482 11 140 6 140 29 622 24 622 04 PRIME MINISTER'S OFFICE 15 262 19 689 7 575 7 700 22 837 27 389 05 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL 1 391 1 391 560 800 1 951 2 191 06 MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL 37 505 43 639 4 200 4 500 41 705 48 139 

=== PAGE 94 ===
 94 
(Million CFAF) HEAD RB PIB TOTAL 2024 2025 2024 2025 2024 2025 RELATIONS 07 MINISTRY OF TERRITORIAL ADMINISTRATION 38 331 39 310 2 810 3 200 41 141 42 510 08 MINISTRY OF JUSTICE 63 811 67 778 6 120 7 030 69 931 74 808 09 SUPREME COURT 3 235 3 607 2 200 2 200 5 435 5 807 10 MINISTRY OF PUBLIC  CONTRACTS 13 561 15 590 1 000 1 200 14 561 16 790 11 SUPREME STATE AUDIT 4 474 4 800 1 700 1 800 6 174 6 600 12 GENERAL DELEGATION OF NATIONAL SECURITY 101 047 116 096 8 000 6 000 109 047 122 096 13 MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 317 439 343 860 18 000 21 000 335 439 364 860 14 MINISTRY OF ARTS AND CULTURE 5 177 7 979 1 100 1 450 6 277 9 429 15 MINISTRY OF BASIC EDUCATION 272 005 285 894 25 390 27 720 297 395 313 614 16 MINISTRY OF SPORTS AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION 23 204 27 586 1 810 3 500 25 014 31 086 
17 MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATION 5 308 6 234 600 1 050 5 908 7 284 18 MINISTRY OF HIGHER EDUCATION 71 703 123 418 10 000 13 250 81 703 136 668 19 MINISTRY OF SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH AND INNOVATION 12 341 23 079 2 725 6 827 15 066 29 906 20 MINISTRY OF FINANCE 61 588 87 115 4 550 9 600 66 138 96 715 21 MINISTRY OF TRADE 8 061 9 481 1 030 1 880 9 091 11 361 22 MINISTRY OF ECONOMY, PLANNING AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT 30 190 45 082 33 180 107 050 63 370 152 132 
23 MINISTRY OF TOURISM AND LEISURE 4 164 4 609 4 200 4 700 8 364 9 309 25 MINISTRY OF SECONDARY EDUCATION 542 368 563 956 14 365 20 210 556 733 584 166 26 MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND CIVIC EDUCATION 19 686 22 182 7 930 7 825 27 616 30 007 
27 MINISTRY OF DECENTRALIZATION AND LOCAL DEVELOPMENT 26 950 37 165 68 978 89 000 95 929 126 165 
28 MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, NATURE PROTECTION AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
6 446 9 740 1 870 2 140 8 316 11 880 
29 MINISTRY OF MINES,   INDUSTRY AND TECHNOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT 6 969 10 154 1 300 3 000 8 269 13 154 

=== PAGE 95 ===
 95 
(Million CFAF) HEAD RB PIB TOTAL 2024 2025 2024 2025 2024 2025 30 MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT 61 777 44 093 47 869 63 081 109 646 107 174 
31 MINISTRY OF LIVESTOCK, FISHERIES AND ANIMAL INDUSTRIES 18 406 18 254 35 345 34 730 53 751 52 984 
32 MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES AND ENERGY 9 069 73 430 342 225 419 928 351 294 493 358 
33 MINISTRY OF FORESTRY AND WILDLIFE 13 138 13 804 7 180 8 250 20 318 22 054 35 MINISTRY OF EMPLOYMENT AND VOCATIONAL TRAINING 23 084 24 100 5 775 9 020 28 859 33 120 36 MINISTRY OF PUBLIC WORKS 60 046 110 736 475 345 527 840 535 391 638 576 37 MINISTRY OF STATE PROPERTY, SURVEYS AND LAND TENURE 19 849 22 668 780 2 500 20 629 25 168 
38 MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT  13 807 13 135 125 443 144 620 139 251 157 755 
39 MINISTRY OF SMALL AND MEDIUM-SIZED ENTERPRISES,SOCIAL ECONOMY AND HANDICRAFT 8 133 10 593 3 322 5 896 11 455 16 489 
40 MINISTRY OF PUBLIC HEALTH 198 451 225 469 59 270 71 730 257 721 297 199 41 MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND SOCIAL SECURITY 6 784 7 200 600 700 7 384 7 900 42 MINISTRY OF SOCIAL AFFAIRS 11 095 13 215 9 710 12 110 20 805 25 325 43 MINISTRY OF WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND THE FAMILY 8 433 9 182 1 245 1 600 9 678 10 782 
45 MINISTRY OF POSTS AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS 6 448 9 511 8 820 9 100 15 268 18 611 46 MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT 9 591 8 056 75 614 49 000 85 205 57 056 
48 NATIONAL COMMITEE FOR DISARMAMENT, DEMOBILIZATION AND REINTEGRATION 2 767 3 112 1 300 1 300 4 067 4 412 
49 CONSTITUTIONAL COUNCIL 3 444 3 644 500 500 3 944 4 144 50 MINISTRY OF PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATIVE REFORM 12 082 15 665 3 320 3 050 15 402 18 715 51 ELECTIONS CAMEROON 11 583 11 583 850 1 000 12 433 12 583 52 CAMEROON HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION 3 496 3 496 1 300 1 300 4 796 4 796 53 SENATE 11 962 1 962 4 200 4 200 16 162 16 162 54 NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR THE PROMOTION OF BILINGUALISM AND 2 558 2 978 500 520 3 058 3 498 

=== PAGE 96 ===
 96 
(Million CFAF) HEAD RB PIB TOTAL 2024 2025 2024 2025 2024 2025 MULTICULTURALISM 55 PENSIONS 258 668 270 369 0 0 258 668 270 369 56 EXTERNAL PUBLIC DEBT 825 000 941 000 0 0 825 000 941 000 57 DOMESTIC PUBLIC DEBT 1 427 300 1 124 500 0 0 1 427 300 1 124 500 60 STATE SUBSIDIES AND CONTRIBUTIONS 579 896 175 705 0 0 579 896 175 705 65 COMMON EXPENDITURE 233 922 218 682 0 0 233 922 218 682 92 PARTICIPATIONS 0 0 25 000 10 000 25 000 10 000 93 REHABILITATION/RESTRUCTURING 0 0 8 000 5 000 8 000 5000 94 INTERVENTIONS IN INVESTMENT 0 0 104 624 100 042 104 624 100 042 95 CARRY-OVER 4000 4000 3000 3000 7000 7000 TOTAL 5 608 430 5 387 710 1 604 070 1 863 090 7 212 500 7 250 800  CHAPTER TWO SPECIAL APPROPRIATIONS ACCOUNTS  SECTION EIGHTY: Amounts of commitment authorizations and payment appropriations for the Special Appropriations Accounts opened on the programmes shall be as follows: (Unit: Thousands of CFAF) PROGRAMMES CA PA CODE PROGRAMME TITLE 2025 2025 ELECTRICITY SECTOR DEVELOPMENT FUND 15 000 000 15 000 000 137 ACCESS TO ENERGY  15 000 000 15 000 000   SPECIAL FUND FOR FINANCING THE RECONSTRUCTION OF ECONOMICALLY DISADVANTAGED AREAS IN THE FAR NORTH, NORTH-WEST, AND SOUTH-WEST REGIONS 36 400 000 36 400 000 975 RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME FOR THE FAR NORTH REGION 11 331 181 11 331 181 976 PRESIDENTIAL PLAN FOR THE RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE NORTH-WEST AND SOUTH-WEST REGIONS 25 068 819 25 068 819   POSTAL SECTOR DEVELOPMENT 900 000 900 000 129 EXPANDING THE NETWORK AND IMPROVING NATIONAL POSTAL COVERAGE 900 000 900 000   SPECIAL FUND FOR ELECTRONIC SECURITY 1 500 000 1 500 000 

=== PAGE 97 ===
 97 
(Unit: Thousands of CFAF) PROGRAMMES CA PA CODE PROGRAMME TITLE 2025 2025 132  SECURING THE NATIONAL DIGITAL ECOSYSTEM 1 500 000 1 500 000   SUPPORT FOR CULTURAL POLICY 200 000 200 000 148 CONSERVATION  OF CAMEROONIAN CULTURE AND ART 32 000 32 000 149 DEVELOPMENT AND ENHANCEMENT OF THE PROMOTION OF CULTURAL GOODS AND SERVICES  168 000 168 000   FINANCING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS IN WATER AND SANITATION 900 000 900 000 138 ACCESS TO DRINKING WATER AND LIQUID SANITATION 900 000 900 000   NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT FUND 1 500 000 1 500 000 002 CLIMATE CHANGE, DESERTIFICATION AND DROUGHT 681 000 681 000 091 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT  819 000 819 000   FOREST DEVELOPMENT 3 000 000 3 000 000 054 DEVELOPMENT AND RENEWAL OF FOREST RESOURCES 2300000 2 300 000 058 DEVELOPMENT OF TIMBER AND NON-TIMBER FOREST RESOURCES  700 000 700 000   WILDLIFE PROTECTION SPECIAL FUND 500 000 500 000 056 SECURING AND ENHANCING WILDLIFE RESOURCES AND PROTECTED AREAS 500 000 500 000   PRODUCTION OF SECURE TRANSPORT DOCUMENTS 6 000 000 6 000 000 153 DEVELOPMENT OF ROAD TRANSPORT, INTERMODALITY AND ROAD SAFETY 2 942 400 2 942 400 155 DEVELOPMENT OF MARITIME, RIVER AND LAKE TRANSPORT AND PORT ACTIVITIES 3 057 600 3 057 600   SUPPORT AND DEVELOPMENT OF TOURISM AND LEISURE ACTIVITIES 1 000 000 1 000 000 014 PROMOTION OF TOURISM AND LEISURE ACTIVITIES 1 000 000 1 000 000   

=== PAGE 98 ===
 98 
(Unit: Thousands of CFAF) PROGRAMMES CA PA CODE PROGRAMME TITLE 2025 2025 TOTAL EXPENDITURES FROM SAAs 66 900 000 66 900 000  PART THREE SPECIAL PROVISIONS  CHAPTER ONE THIRD-PARTY GUARANTEES, AGREEMENTS AND DEBTS  SECTION EIGHTY-ONE:   (1)  Government shall be authorized to grant, during the 2025 financial year, State guarantee to public establishments and public and private companies in respect of domestic loans, for a total amount not exceeding CFAF 200 billion. (2) The ceiling on the State guarantee granted by Government to public establishments and enterprises in respect of external loans shall be set at CFAF 40 billion for the 2025 financial year.   (3) Conditions for implementing the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 above shall be specified by regulation.  SECTION EIGHTY-TWO:   (1) The ceiling on public entities' receivables from the State that Government is authorized to transfer to commercial banks shall be set at CFAF 75 billion for the 2025 financial year.  (2) Conditions for implementing the provisions of paragraph 1 above shall be laid down by regulation.  CHAPTER TWO OTHER SPECIAL PROVISIONS    SECTION EIGHTY-THREE: General provisions relating to public funds allocated to the Deposit and Consignment Fund (CDEC)  1. Until specific regulations are adopted, conditions for controlling and verifying the funds and assets allocated to the Deposit and Consignment Fund (CDEC) shall be those laid down in the Manual of Tax Procedures of the General Tax Code, subject to any special provisions that may apply to some of these funds and assets. 2. Where necessary, a separate instrument by the minister in charge of finance shall determine the practical conditions for the implementation of the provision referred to in the previous paragraph.  

=== PAGE 99 ===
 99 
SECTION EIGHTY-FOUR: During the 2025 financial year, to meet the needs of the country in the context of its economic, social and cultural development, the President of the Republic of Cameroon shall be authorized to amend, by means of an Ordinance, the ceilings set out in Sections 75, 81 and 82 above.  SECTION EIGHTY-FIVE:   1. The President of the Republic shall be authorized to amend financial, tax and customs legislation by decree. 2. Government shall be authorized to use the new resources resulting from these measures to meet its commitments.  SECTION EIGHTY-SIX: The President of the Republic shall be authorized to take, by way of ordinance, all measures necessary for the implementation of the structural reforms provided for under the agreements concluded with the international financial community.  SECTION EIGHTY-SEVEN: The ordinances referred to in Sections eighty-four, eighty-five et eighty-six above shall be tabled for ratification before the Bureaus of the National Assembly and the Senate during the parliamentary session following their publication.  SECTION EIGHTY- EIGHT: This law shall be registered, published according to the procedure of urgency and inserted in the Official Gazette in English and French.  