
=== PAGE 1 ===
1 
TAXATION 1 
CHAPTER ONE 
INTRODUCTORY NOTIONS ON TAXATION 
1) DEFINITION OF TAXATION  
Taxation can be perceived as the system of raising money to finance government or as a means by 
which governments  finance their expenditures by imposing charges on citizens and corporate 
entities. The Oxford Dictionary of accounting defines taxation as ‘ a levy on individuals or 
corporate bodies by central or local government in order to finance the expenditure of tha t 
government and also as a means of implementing its fiscal policy’. The dictionary further specifies 
that ‘payments for specific services rendered to or for the payer are not regarded as taxation’.  
Other scholars define taxation as ‘the science which studies the set of monetary deductions carried 
out by the state on natural and artificial persons’. In practice, we have taxes at the core of taxation. 
 2) TAXES AND RELATED TERMINOLOGIES  
A tax can be defined as "a compulsory payment, levy, duty or contribut ion, without direct 
compensation demanded by the state or its decentralised organs from natural and artificial 
persons." From this definition, the following main features describe taxes:  
- A tax is a “compulsory payment” as it is a right for the fiscal ad ministration to collect its taxes 
(attribution of sovereignty) and the taxpayer equally has the obligation to pay the taxes.  
- A tax is a payment without any “direct compensation” required to be provided to the payer”. The 
taxpayer may enjoy certain benefits from the state, but they hardly correspond to the amount paid 
as taxes.  
- A tax is a “monetary payment” as it is negotiated and assessed in terms of the legal currency of 
the state.  
Taxes are given different descriptions based either on the reason fo r charging the taxpayer to pay 
the given tax, or the beneficiary of the tax. The following terms are used in the domain of taxation 
either as a notion of tax or interchangeably.  
Rates: They represent the revenue of local authorities and can be described as levies to be paid to 
the various local authority organs of the state when a public service is required by a citizen, or in 
general, to help provide revenue for any decentralised organ of the state.  
Duties: They are similar to a tax in that their payment confers the right to use a public service.  
Contributions: These are levies imposed on the population to help the state in the provision of 
social services or social insurance understandings. Examples are levies made for the interest of the 
National Social Insurance Fund, to the Local Council Support Fund, to the Housing Loan Fund or 
the National Employment Fund.  
Tariffs: They represent the ranges of duties on imports and other home-made products.  
Apart from  these terms used as taxes, it is equally important to master the following terms 
commonly used in the domain of taxation:  
The tax bearer: The tax bearer is that natural or artificial person subject to the domain of 
application of an obligatory payment and who bears the burden of the said payment.  

=== PAGE 2 ===
2 
TAXATION 1 
The taxpayer: The taxpayer on the other side is that natural or artificial person who has carried 
out an operation which generates taxes. There are two classes of taxpayers: the legal taxpayer and 
the actual taxpayer.  
- The legal taxpayer is the person (natural or artificial) who is responsible for the payment of the 
tax to the fiscal administration.  
- The actual taxpayer is the tax bearer, which is the person who bears the burden of the tax.  
Tax base (tax assessment base): This is the specific aspect or domain on which a tax is levied, 
for instance an individual’s income for income tax, the profits of companies for corporation tax, 
the estate of a deceased person for inheritance tax, or the value of a landed p roperty for land tax. 
In simple terms, the tax base is the amount/value on which the tax rate is applied or the income 
bracket for the tax.  
Tax returns: These are forms used by taxpayers to make periodic tax declarations and payments.  
Tax-deductible: This is an amount that can be deducted from income or profits in order to obtain 
the final amount of income or profit that is subject to tax.  
Tax allowance: This is a deduction made in calculating the taxable income. It reduces the tax base 
and serves as a tax benefit.  
Taxable income: This is the income liable to taxation. It is calculated by deducting income tax 
allowances and tax-deductible expenses from the taxpayer’s gross income.  
Tax bracket: These are figures between which incomes or amounts are subjected to a specific rate 
of tax. For instance, income between 1 and 2 000 000 CFAF is tax at 10%, between 2 000 001 and 
3 000 000 CFAF at 15%, etc.  
A tax advantage: This is a benefit enjoyed by a taxpayer as a result of a reduction in a charge to 
taxation.  
Tax rebate: This is a repayment of a tax already paid by a taxpayer. It is like a refund on taxes 
earlier paid by the taxpayer. In order to obtain a tax rebate, the taxpayer has to make a repayment 
claim to the Inspector of Taxes and the refund due to the taxpayer will be made by the Collector 
of Taxes following the Inspector’s instructions.  
Tax exempt: This represents an item (payment, income, revenue, a llowance, etc) which is not 
subject to taxation. That is, a tax-free item.  
A tax heaven: This is a state, country or territory where certain taxes are levied at a low rate or 
not at all. It also refers to countries which have a system of financial secrecy in place. It is an area 
identified as having a composite tax structure deliberately established to take advantage of, and 
exploit a worldwide demand for opportunities to engage in tax avoidance.  
Tax avoidance: This is a legal usage of the tax regime in a given country to one’s own advantage 
to reduce the amount of tax that is payable by means within the law.  
Tax sheltering: This is a legal method of minimising or decreasing an investor’s taxable income 
and, therefore, his or her tax liability. Tax shelte rs can range from investments or investment 
accounts that provide favourable tax treatment, to activities or transactions that lower taxable 

=== PAGE 3 ===
3 
TAXATION 1 
income. It is very similar to tax avoidance, although unlike tax avoidance, it is not necessarily 
legal.  
Tax evasion: is the illegal evasion of taxes by individuals, corporations and trusts. This entails 
taxpayers deliberately misrepresenting the true state of their affairs to the tax authorities in order 
to reduce their tax liability and includes dishonest tax report ing, such as declaring less income, 
profits or gains than the amount actually earned, or overstating deductions. It is commonly 
associated with the informal sector.  
Tax liability: This is the total amount of tax that an entity or individual is legally obligated to pay 
to an authority as a result of the occurrence of a taxable event. This is obtained by applying the 
appropriate tax rate on the tax base.  
Taxable event: This is any event or transaction that results in a tax consequence or tax liability 
for the party who executes the event. Common examples of taxable events for investors include 
the receiving of dividends and interests, selling securities for a gain and exercising options.  
 
3) FUNCTIONS OF TAXES  
The functions of taxes can be perceived from two points of view:  
- The fiscal function;  
- The instrumental function.  
 
3.1) The fiscal function of taxes  
This function refers to “how the government spends taxes”. In a state, country or community, the 
citizens or members of that community require a certain number of needs. Individually, these 
people cannot succeed in acquiring all the resources needed to satisfy these needs. Collectively, 
these people can use their collective efforts through the coordinati on of the state to acquire 
resources which can satisfy these needs. Therefore, the execution of duties of collective interest 
falls in the hands of the state. 
3.2) The instrumental function of taxes  
In addition to using taxation to raise money (which is the main function or purpose of taxation), a 
government uses taxes as an excellent means of intervention in the economy or the society. A 
government may raise or levy taxes to achieve social and economic objectives, or to achieve 
political popularity with certain groups. Taxation can redistribute a society’s wealth by imposing 
a heavier tax burden on one group in order to fund services for another. Also, some economists 
consider taxation as an important tool for maintaining the stability of a country’s economy. 
4) TYPES OF TAXATION SYSTEMS  
Tax systems are the means by which taxes are raised and collected in accordance with the tax 
legislation. Taxes can be levied following one of the following systems:  
- the proportional tax system;  
- the progressive tax system;  

=== PAGE 4 ===
4 
TAXATION 1 
- the regressive tax system;  
- the ad valorem or percentage tax system;  
- the per capita tax system;  
- The specific or unit tax system.  
 
4.1) The proportional tax system  
A proportional tax imposes the same percentage of taxat ion on everyone, regardless of income. 
The amount of the tax to be paid is obtained by applying a fixed rate of tax on the assessment base 
of the tax. The tax rate remains constant whatever the amount of the assessment base.  
For instance, if the tax rate is 10% on the monthly income, a person earning 100 000 CFAF is 
required to pay 10 000 CFAF as tax; while another person who earns 250 000 CFAF also pays 
10% of it, that is 25 000 CFAF; every income earner pays 10% of his income.  
Though favoured by the economist, Adam Smith, a proportional system of taxation is nowadays 
regarded as being less equitable than a progressive system.  
4.2) The progressive tax system  
The progressive tax imposes a higher percentage rate of taxation on those with higher incomes. It 
is a system where the rate of taxation increases as income increases, so that a person with an 
income of 100 000 CFAF may pays 11 000 CFAF in income tax (that is, 11% of his income) 
whereas a person with an income of 500 000 CFAF may pay 13 50 0 CFAF in tax (27% of his 
income). This is the principle of pay as you earn (PAYE).  
Where great inequality of income exists, a progressive system of taxation is regarded as being 
more equitable than a proportional system. The personal income tax in Camero on is an example 
of a progressive tax.  
4.3) The regressive tax system  
The regressive tax system imposes a higher percentage rate of taxation on low incomes than on 
high incomes. Some economists consider sales taxes regressive because individuals with hig her 
incomes spend a smaller proportion of their incomes on sales taxes than those with lower incomes. 
A poor person and a rich person who spend the same amount on groceries each year will pay the 
same amount in sales taxes, even though the rich person earns more money. However, rich people 
consume more than poor people.  
4.4) The ad valorem or percentage tax system  
Here, the amount of tax paid depends on the value of the commodity e.g. 10 % of the value of the 
good may be paid as taxes.  
4.5) The per capita tax system  
Here, the tax is levied per head. That is, every tax subject pays the same amount as tax, regardless 
of social or income earning capacity.  
4.6) The specific tax system  

=== PAGE 5 ===
5 
TAXATION 1 
The amount of tax paid depends on the quantity of the good bought. A spe cific tax on wine is on 
the quantity of wine rather than on its price. A bottle of expensive wine then bears the same cost 
as a bottle of cheap wine.  
5) THE PRINCIPLES OR CANONS OF TAXATION  
Canons of taxation describe the basic principles to be followed by governments and local 
authorities in formulating their taxation policies so as to optimize their tax systems. This is based 
on the ideal of harvesting as much as possible from taxes, while minimising the effects of taxes on 
individuals and activities.  
According to the economist, Adams Smith , governments have to observe four basic principles 
when formulating taxation policies: 
 Equality;  
 Certainty ;  
 Convenience; and  
 Economy.  
5.1) Equality  
According to this principle, the subjects of every state ought to contribute towards the support of 
the government as nearly as possible, in proportion to their respective abilities. That is, in 
proportion to the revenue that they respectively enjoy under the protection of that state. There are 
three ways of collecting taxes from individuals so that it falls equally on individuals. These are:  
The per capita tax system: Here, everyone pays the same contribution, say 5 000 CFAF per head, 
as in the example of the poll tax.  
The proportional tax system: Here, everyone pays the same proportion of their income in the 
tax, say 10%. This was Adams Smith’s "equal" tax.  
The progressive tax system: Here, the amount of tax is adjusted to fall most heavily on the rich.  
 
Of these three systems of tax, the per capita may be said to be fair, the proportional may be said 
to be unjust, while the progressive taxation system is the fairest system for taxes. This system has 
therefore been adopted by most nations.  
5.2) Certainty  
According to this principle, the tax which each individual is bound to pay ought to be certain and 
not arbitrary. The time of payment, the manner of payment, the quantity to be paid, ought all to be 
clear and plain. A system of tax collecti on which is not certain will almost invariably cause 
discontent.  
5.3) Convenience  
According to this principle, every tax ought to be levied at the time, or in the manner, in which it 
is most likely to be convenient for the contributor to pay it. This rule also helps the government to 
maintain as far as possible the flow of revenue at the same pace as that of expenditure. Again, 

=== PAGE 6 ===
6 
TAXATION 1 
taxes are invariably a burden at the time of payment, even when the taxpayer agrees that they are 
just and equitable. Their colle ction at the most convenient point reduces losses by non -payment 
and simplifies the whole process.  
5.4) Economy  
According to this principle, every tax ought to be so contrived (or designed) as both to take out 
and keep out of the pockets of people as lit tle as possible over and above what it brings in to the 
public treasury of the state . This canon, in the narrow sense of the term, requires that as little as 
possible, consistent with efficiency, should be spent on administration and collection. Or, in other 
words, the yield should be greater than the cost of collection, as any tax which costs more than it 
raises in revenue is clearly a waste of time.  
6) THE CLASSIFICATION OF TAXES  
Taxes might be levied on income, on capital or on expenditure. Taxes are c lassified either on the 
basis of the tax base or the manner in which the tax is paid to the state.  
6.1) Classification of taxes based on the tax base  
On the basis of the tax base, taxes fall within the following categories:  
i) Taxes on income: The tax base here is the income or profits of the taxpayer. For example the 
personal income tax, capital gains tax and corporation tax.  
ii) Taxes on capital: The tax base in this case is the value of an item or wealth in general. As 
examples we have the Capital transfer tax, inheritance tax, tax on capital of companies.  
iii) Taxes on expenditures: The tax base for this type of taxes is the value of the expenditure, 
which is generally represented by the net financial value of the item. Examples are the Value 
Added Tax and excise duties.  
iv) Taxes on activity: The tax base here is a particular activity and the tax is paid on the basis of 
the simple fact that this activity is carried out by the taxpayer. Examples are business licence, 
liquor licence, and the global tax paid by small business units.  
v) Taxes on property: The tax base here is the value of an asset controlled by the taxpayer. 
Examples are real estate taxes.  
6.2) Classification of taxes based on the manner of payment  
The above categories of taxes fall under two classes of taxes as per the manner of their payment 
to the state: direct and indirect taxes  
 Direct Taxes: These taxes are paid directly to the taxation authority by the person against 
whom the taxes are levied. That is the taxpayer is the tax bearer. They include taxes on 
income, on activity and on capital.  
 Indirect taxes: Here, the person against whom the ta x is levied does not directly pay the 
tax to the tax authority. That is, the taxpayer is different from the tax bearer. They in most 
cases are taxes on expenditures.  

=== PAGE 7 ===
7 
TAXATION 1 
 
7. THE EFFECTS OF TAXATION  
Economists have devoted considerable effort to study how tax es affect people’s behaviour, 
including their choices in working, saving, and investing. To understand the effect of any tax, one 
must first determine who bears the burden of the tax. The way a tax affects people is called the tax 
incidence.  
 The effect of taxes on labour supply  
Taxes can affect labour supply by influencing people's decisions about whether to work and how 
much to work.  
 The effect of taxes on saving  
Saving is the portion of income that is not spent. Might taxes levied on returns to saving  (such as 
interest and dividends) influence the amount people save? When a tax is levied on interest or 
dividends, it reduces the reward for saving. This tends to reduce the amount of saving that an 
individual does.  
 The effect of taxes on physical investment  
 
In effect, a tax on business income is a tax on the physical investment’s return: the tax reduces the 
firm’s income and thus the benefit from making the investment. Most economists believe that 
business taxes decrease the amount of physical investment by businesses.  
 The effect of taxes on the standard of living  
When taxes are levied on necessaries of life, there is a danger that they should cause hardship to 
those with low income, and depress the standards of living of workers who are not or near th e 
minimum necessary for full efficiency. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 8 ===
8 
TAXATION 1 
CHAPTER TWO 
THE CAMEROON TAXATION ENVIRONMENT 
 1) TAXPAYERS ASSESSMENT SYSTEMS IN CAMEROON  
The taxes to be paid by a taxpayer depend on the taxation system or regime. According to section 
93 of the GTC, there are three tax assessment systems in Cameroon on the basis of the turnover 
realised by the business:  
- The Global Tax system (or regime);  
- The Simplified taxation system;  
- The Actual Earnings (or Real) taxation system.  
- The regime of non-profit organisations 
 
 1.1) The Global Tax (or flat rate taxation) System  
This is for natural persons or sole proprietors whose annual turnover is less than 10 000 000 CFAF, 
except for forestry exploiters or logging companies and persons of the liberal professions. The tax 
payable is called Global Tax. It is paid quarterly to the council of the locality of the business.  
According to section C46 of the GTC, each council shall classify activities into categories and tax 
them based on the following tax brackets:  
Category A: From 0 to 20 000 CFAF.  
Category B: From 20 001 to 40 000 CFAF.  
Category C: From 40 001 to 50 000 CFAF.  
Category D: From 50 001 to 100 000 CFAF.  
Activities are assessed under the global tax on the basis of  the annual turnover of the sole trader 
and categorised as follows: 
 Category A shall comprise: producers, service providers and traders with an annual 
turnover lower than 2 500 000 CFAF;  
 Category B shall comprise: producers, service providers and traders with an annual 
turnover between 2 500 000 CFAF and 5 000 000 CFAF;  
 Category C shall comprise: producers, service providers and traders with an annual 
turnover between 5 000 000 CFAF and 7 500 000 CFAF;  
 Category D shall comprise:  
- Producers, service providers and sole traders with an annual turnover between 7 500 000 CFAF 
and 10 000 000 CFAF;  
- For operators of games of chance and entertainment: operators of less than 10 baby foot 
machines, operators of less than 5 pinball and video games machines, operators of less than 3 slot 
cash machines.  
According to section C 47 (2) of the GTC, hawkers who show proof of payment of the Global Tax 
to the council of his place of residence shall not be taxable in other council areas for the same 
activity.  

=== PAGE 9 ===
9 
TAXATION 1 
Based on the Presidential ordinance of July 7th 2014 reducing certain taxes paid by transporters, 
as a means of regulating the inflationary effect of transport fare due to the increase in fuel prices, 
the rates of the global tax for transporters were reduced as follows:  
Cat A: 0 to 10 000 CFAF  
Cat B: 10 0001 to 20 000 CFAF  
Cat C: 20 0001 to 25 000 CFAF  
Cat D: 25 0001 to 50 000 CFAF 
Councils are allowed, within each category, to apply specific rates to each activity. The global tax 
is paid per council, per establishment and per activity. The payment of the global tax excludes the 
payment of the business license, the personal or company income tax and the value added tax.  
According to section C46 (3) of the GTC , when it is not possible to determine the annual turnover 
of the sole proprietor, activities liable to the Global Tax shall be classify by their nature and not 
on the basis of the annual turnover. 
1.2) The Simplified Taxation System 
According to section 93 (c) (2) of the GTC, this is for natural and artificial persons with an annual 
turnover of at least 10 000 000 and less than 50 000 000 CFAF, except for passenger transporters 
and operators of games of chance and entertainment. 
There are two types of taxes in the system, depending on the legal status of the taxpayer: the 
Personal Income Tax and the Corporation or Company Tax. 
1.2.1) The Personal Income Tax (PIT)  
This is the income tax payable by natural persons and sole proprietors on salaries and related 
remunerations for workers, profits from industria l, agricultural, commercial and non-commercial 
activities and revenues from securities. Sections 69 and 70 of the GTC brings out five different 
types of Personal Income Taxes, depending on the type of income as follows:  
 For earnings of workers, this tax i s calculated at the end of each accounting period by 
applying the following rates on the net taxable earnings:  
 - from 0 to 2 000 000 CFAF: 10% 
 - from 2 000 001 to 3 000 000 CFAF: 15% 
 - from 3 000 001 to 5 000 000 CFAF: 25% 
 - more than 5 000 000 CFAF: 35% 
 For taxable profits from industrial, commercial, agricultural and non -commercial 
activities, the tax shall be 30% of the net taxable profit. This taxable profit is the gross 
surplus of revenues over the expenses required for operations as determined by the 
simplified accounting system.  
 For revenues from real estates, the tax shall be 30% of the net taxable revenue.  
 For revenues from securities, the tax shall be at a flat rate of 15% of the net taxable 
revenue.  
 For non-commercial revenues and profits, the tax shall be 10% of the net taxable revenue.  

=== PAGE 10 ===
10 
TAXATION 1 
NB: The above-mentioned rates shall be increased by 10% representin g the additional council 
tax rate.  
An advanced personal income tax is paid by persons assessed under the simplified taxation system 
as follows:  
 The taxpayer makes a payment of 5.5% (5% as principal rate and additional council rate at 10% 
of principal rate) of the turnover of each month not later than the 15th of the following month.  
 According to sections 80 and 74 of the GTC, the down payments made during the financial year 
shall be deducted from the annual tax liability and the balance shall be paid in a single installment 
not later than the 15th of March of the following year.  
 According to section 69 of the GTC, the amount of the annual tax cannot be less than the fiscal 
minimum tax which is equal to 5.5% (5% + 10% of 5% as additional council tax rate).  
 
1.2.2) The Corporation or Company Tax (C.T)  
This is the income tax payable by artificial persons. According to section 17of the GTC, this tax is 
calculated at the end of each accounting period by applying a rate of 33% on the taxable profit of 
the year rounded down to the nearest thousand CFAF. The 33% represents 30% as principal rate 
plus 10% of principal rate as additional council tax rate.  
According to section 21 of the GTC , the company tax is paid by persons assessed under the 
simplified taxation system as follows:  
- The taxpayer makes a payment of 5.5% of the turnover for the month not later than the 15th of 
the next month.  
- According to section 22 (1) of the GTC, the down payments made during the financial year shall 
be deducted from the annual tax liability and the balance shall be paid spontaneously in a single 
payment not later than the 15th of March of the following year.  
 
Illustration 1: Determination of annual income tax liability under the simplified system  
A business realises an annual turnover of 15 650 500 CFAF.  
Required: Determine the annual income tax liability and the tax balance outstanding at year end 
under the following assumptions:  
i. The taxable profit is 6 350 600 CFAF.  
ii. The taxable profit is 2 350 600 CFAF.  
1.3) The Actual Earnings Taxation System  
This is for natural and artificial persons with an annual turnover of at least 50 000 000 CFAF. 
There are equally two types of taxes in the system, depending on the legal status of the taxpayer: 
the Personal Income Tax for natural persons or the Corporation Tax for corporate bodies.  
Section 21 of the GTC , brings in a distinctive group of tax payers known as “regulated profit 
margin sectors”. These sectors comprise of the distribution of petroleum products using pumps 
(fuel filling stations) and the distribution of (flour) mill products. 
1.3.1) The Personal Income Tax (PIT)  
It is paid by natural persons assessed under the actual system as proven by an annual turnover of 
at least 50 000 000 CFAF. The tax is computed on the taxable income of the sole propriet or or 

=== PAGE 11 ===
11 
TAXATION 1 
worker as shown above. The personal income tax is paid by persons assessed under the actual 
earnings taxation system as follows:  
- The taxpayer makes a down or cash payment of 2.2% of the turnover for the month not later than 
the 15th of the following month.  
- The down payments made during the financial year shall be deducted from the annual tax liability 
and the balance shall be declared and paid not later than the 15th of March of the following year 
(section 74 of the GTC).  
- The annual tax liability cannot be less than the fiscal minimum tax which is equal to 2.2% of the 
yearly turnover before tax (section 69 of the GTC).  
 
However, as for taxpayers of the “regulated profit margin sectors”, the base of calculating the tax 
shall be:  
- For the distribution of petroleum products (fuel filling stations) and the distribution of flour mill 
products, the turnover shall be made up of the gross margin, including all types of commissions 
and allowances earned.  
- As for production ent erprises of the flour mill sector, the turnover shall be the total of the 
production sold after a reduction of 50%.  
1.3.2) The Corporation or Company Tax (C.T)  
This is the income tax payable by artificial persons assessed under the actual system as proven by 
an annual turnover of at least 50 000 000 CFAF. The tax is computed on the taxable income of the 
corporate body as shown in section 1.2.2 above. The corporation tax is paid by persons assessed 
under the actual earnings taxation system as follows:  
However, section 108 and 124 of the GTC (FL 2021) provides an incentive company tax rate as 
follows:  
 
Section 108 (new): Companies that issue stocks on the Central African Stock Exchange shall be 
entitled to a reduced company tax rate of 25%.  
Section 124b: (1) Innovative start-ups in the field of information and communication technologies, 
grouped within management structures set up as approved management centres, shall enjoy the 
following tax advantages: 
 
a) During the incubation phase, which must not exceed 5 years: exemption from all taxes, duties, 
levies and payments with the exception of social security contributions;  
b) At the end of the incubation phase:  
i. In the event of the sale of the "start-up": application of a reduced rate of 10% on the capital 
gain on the sale;  
ii. In the event of entry into the operation phase, the company shall, for a period of five (5) years, 
benefit from:  
- application of a reduced company tax rate of 15%;  
Advances payment that can be made within the year:   
- The taxpayer makes a down or cash payment of 2.2% of the turnover for the month not later than 
the 15th of the following month; the rate shall be 1.5% companies that issue stocks on the Central 
African Stock Exchange. 

=== PAGE 12 ===
12 
TAXATION 1 
- The down payments made during the financial year shall be deducted from the annual tax liability 
and the balance shall be declared and paid not later than the 15st of March of the following year 
(section 21 of the GTC).  
- The amount of the annual tax liability cannot be less than the fiscal minimum tax which is equal 
to 2.2% of the yearly turnover before tax (section 22 of the GTC).  
However, as for taxpayers of the “regulated profit margin sectors”, the base of calculating the tax 
shall be as indicated in 1.3.1 above. 
Illustration 2: Determination of annual income tax liability under the actual system  
A business realises an annual turnover of 65 750 750 CFAF.  
Required: Determine the annual income tax lia bility and the tax balance outstanding at year end 
under the following assumptions:  
i. The taxable profit is 20 340 500 CFAF.  
ii. The taxable profit is 2 350 600 CFAF.  
1.4. The regime of non-profit organisations 
1.4.1. Entities subject to this regime 
The regime of non-profit organisations covers any entity with or without legal personality, public, 
private or religious, including foundations, whose purpose is not to seek profits for distribution 
among its members and whose activity is not in competitio n with those carried out by profit -
making entities. These include: 
a) Subject to conventions, international bodies and non-governmental organisations;  
b) Public establishments and decentralised territorial authorities, as well as their public service 
boards;  
c) Companies or bodies recognised as being of public utility  
d) Public low-cost housing agencies;  
e) Associations of any kind, de jure or de facto, mutual societies, private clubs and circles; 
f) Welfare and social security organisations;  
g) Public and denominational educational and health institutions; 
h) In general, anybody, whether or not it has a legal personality, whose main purpose is not to 
carry out commercial activities. 
1.4.2. Tax Isues 
Non-profit organisations shall be subject to the tax registration requirement referred to in Article 
L1 of the tax Code. They shall be exempt from: 
- The business licence; - the corporate tax; - the property tax. 
Notwithstanding, liable to the value added tax on goods and services acquired within the 
framework of their operation; - registration and stamp duties; or income taxes on their investments; 
or withholding taxes for which they are legally liable. 

=== PAGE 13 ===
13 
TAXATION 1 
(3) Non -profit organisations shall be subject to value added tax when they carry out taxable 
operations in accordance with the provisions of Articles 125 et seq. of the Code. (4) Income tax 
shall be levied at a preferential rate of 15%, plus 10% in respect of additional communal centimes, 
on the share of commercial activities of non-profit organisations. 
A quarterly advance payment of 1% of the turnover of commercial activities of non -profit 
organisations is paid monthly to the tax centre where they are based. This advance payment is 
increased by 10% in respect of the additional communal centimes and con stitutes the minimum 
collection amount. 
5) Non-profit organisations are subject to a monthly declaration of taxes and duties due, including 
those for which they are only legally liable. (6) Before 15 March each year, non -profit 
organisations shall submit a statistical and tax return, the model for which shall be provided by the 
tax authorities, together with an itemised statement of all sums paid to third parties during the 
previous fiscal year. 
(7) In all cases, non -profit organisations are required to kee p separate accounts for their 
commercial activities. 
2) THE IDENTIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS IN CAMEROON  
According to section L1 of the GTC, every natural or artificial person subject to the payment of a 
tax has to be obligatorily registered beforehand. These persons in their capacity of legal taxpayers 
are obliged to send in an application to the competent taxation service of their locality within a 
period of 15 days as from the date of commencement of activity. This application has to be 
accompanied by a location plan of the business.  
According to Decree No. 95/538/PM of September 1, 1995, fixing the modalities of registration of 
taxpayers, the following persons are subject to be registered as taxpayers:  
 Natural and artificial persons of Cameroonian nationality who have to pay taxes exacted in 
Cameroon.  
 Natural and artificial persons of foreign nationality who carry out economic activities in 
Cameroon either on temporary or permanent basis.  
 
2.1) Registration Requirements and Procedures  
The registration of taxpayers is subject to the presentation of a file which carries the following 
documents:  
 A registration form obtainable from the taxation department, to be filled and signed by the 
taxpayer. This form carries the following information:  
 
 
  The name or business name of the taxpayer.  
 
  The exact address of the headquarters of the business or where need be, those of its 
warehouse, branches or shops.  
 
  The postal address.  
 A certified copy of the National Identity Card for natural persons or an attestation of registration 
from the registry of commerce for artificial persons.  
The procedure then is as follows:  
 The above file is deposited at the taxation service of the taxpayer’s locality (Re gional Tax 
Centre, Divisional Tax Centre or Specialised Tax Centre).  

=== PAGE 14 ===
14 
TAXATION 1 
 The taxpayer obtains a receipt for the file from the taxation service.  
 The file is given a temporary registration number by the competent taxation service and 
forwarded to the central service of the taxation department.  
 A taxpayer’s card is later delivered to the applicant by the central service of the taxation 
department and sent back to the taxation service of the taxpayer’s locality (or by delegation of 
powers by taxation service of the taxpayer’s locality).  
2.2) Taxpayer’s identification number  
There are two basic forms of taxpayer’s identification numbers, depending on whether the person 
is a natural or an artificial person. The person having the identification number can be easily 
identified by the first letter of the number as follows:  
 
  P for physical (or natural) persons,  
 
  M for moral (or artificial) persons.  
The formats for the attribution of the numbers are as follows:  
i) For Natural (Physical) Persons  
 The number starts with the letter P.  
 The letter P is then followed by the month of birth of the proprietor.  
 The month of birth is followed by the year of birth of the proprietor.  
 The year of birth is followed by the taxpayer’s chronological number of eight (8) digits.  
 The identification number finally ends with a letter which represents the taxpayer’s index key.  
 
ii) For Artificial (Moral) Persons  
 The number starts with the letter M.  
 The letter M is then followed by the month of creation of the business.  
 The month of creation is followed by the year of creation of the business.  
 The year of creation of the business is followed by the taxpayer’s chronological number of 
eight (8) digits.  
 The identification number finally ends with a letter which represents the taxpayer’s index key.  
3) THE CAMEROON FISCAL ADMINISTRATION  
The taxation policy of Cameroon and the fiscal administration of taxes are carried out by the 
Ministry of Finance through its specific departments of taxes, customs and treasury. This ministry 
conceives, proposes, regulates and applies fiscal measures to be used in the Cameroon territory.  
The department of taxes with headquarters in Yaoundé and headed by a Director General is 
charged with the conception, implementation and coordi nation of taxation policies and fiscal 
measures related to the General Tax Code and other specific tax codes and laws . Its activities are 
controlled by Regional Tax Centers at the levels of the Regions, divisional tax centers at the levels 
of Divisions, and special tax centres at the levels of subdivisions and districts.  
The department of customs with headquarters in Yaoundé and equally headed by a Director 
General is charged with the conception, implementation and coordination of fiscal measures 
related to the Customs Code. It’s activities are controlled by the various custom units in the 
country.  
The treasury department with headquarters in Yaoundé and also headed by a Director General is 
charged with the collection of various tax revenues on behalf of the state.  

=== PAGE 15 ===
15 
TAXATION 1 
As for the control and management of taxpayers, the fiscal law has provided specific structures at 
both the national (Yaoundé) and regional levels depending on the sizes of taxpayers. These 
structures are:  
 Specialised Management Units,  
 Approved Management Centres,  
 Regional, Divisional and Specialised tax centres.  
3.1) Specialised Management Units (SMUs)  
These units are charged with the control and management of major and medium-sized enterprises. 
The Cameroon GTC in its section 113 defines these enterprises as follows:  
 Major Enterprises are those which realise an annual turnover of at least one billion CFAF.  
 Medium - Sized Enterprises are those which realise an annual turnover of less than one 
billion CFAF.  
Two Specialised Management Units have been put in place by the fiscal law as follows:  
i) The Department of Major Enterprises (DME) or Large Taxpayers’ Unit (LTU): Based in 
Yaoundé, this structure is in charge of managing taxpayers who are classified as major enterprises. 
As such all major enterprises declare and pay their taxes directly to this department in Yaoundé, 
whatever their headquarters or region of operation.  
ii) The Medium-sized Tax Offices (MTO) or Tax Centre for Medium Enterprises (TCME) : 
These tax centres o r tax offices are in charge of controlling and managing taxpayers who are 
classified as medium -sized enterprises. Formally based only in Yaoundé and Douala, these tax 
offices or tax centres have been extended to other major towns of the country such as Lim be, 
Bamenda, and Bafoussam, based on a Finance Ministerial order No. 00000/402/MINFI of 
December 17th 2013 to review the organisation of MTO. This review segmented the MTO into a 
front office unit and a back office unit and broadened the portfolio of MTOs to include all 
taxpayers who are registered for the Value Added Tax (VAT).  
3.2) Approved Management Centres (AMCs)  
According to section 118 of the GTC, these are specific centres set out to assist their members in 
the accomplishment of their fiscal oblig ations and to provide certain fiscal benefits to these 
members. There is no obligation for an enterprise to register as a member of this centre. The only 
legal restriction is that a business should be realising an annual turnover of at most 100 million 
CFAF to be eligible for membership, whatever the taxation system of the business. 
 
3.3) The Regional, Divisional and Specialised tax centres  
Apart from the specialised units for the management of major and medium -sized enterprises, 
small-sized enterprises ar e controlled at the level of the regions, specifically their areas of 
operations or headquarters by regional tax centres, divisional tax centres and specialised tax 
centres. at the levels of sub-divisions and any specialised defined area of jurisdiction as defined by 
the fiscal law. The organisation of the Divisional Tax Centres was reviewed by Finance Ministerial 
order No. 00000313/MINFI of June24th 2014. 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 16 ===
16 
TAXATION 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 