
=== PAGE 1 ===
1 
TAXATION 1 
CHAPTER ONE 
INTRODUCTORY NOTIONS ON TAXATION 
1) DEFINITION OF TAXATION  
Taxation can be perceived as the system of raising money to finance government or as a means by 
which governments finance their expenditures by imposing charges on citizens and corporate 
entities. The Oxford Dictionary of accounting defines taxation as ‘ a levy on individuals or 
corporate bodies by central or local government in order to finance the expenditure of tha t 
government and also as a means of implementing its fiscal policy’. The dictionary further specifies 
that ‘payments for specific services rendered to or for the payer are not regarded as taxation’.  
Other scholars define taxation as ‘the science which studies the set of monetary deductions carried 
out by the state on natural and artificial persons’. In practice, we have taxes at the core of taxation. 
 2) TAXES AND RELATED TERMINOLOGIES  
A tax can be defined as "a compulsory payment, levy, duty or contribut ion, without direct 
compensation demanded by the state or its decentralised organs from natural and artificial 
persons." From this definition, the following main features describe taxes:  
- A tax is a “compulsory payment” as it is a right for the fiscal ad ministration to collect its taxes 
(attribution of sovereignty) and the taxpayer equally has the obligation to pay the taxes.  
- A tax is a payment without any “direct compensation” required to be provided to the payer”. The 
taxpayer may enjoy certain benefits from the state, but they hardly correspond to the amount paid 
as taxes.  
- A tax is a “monetary payment” as it is negotiated and assessed in terms of the legal currency of 
the state.  
Taxes are given different descriptions based either on the reason for charging the taxpayer to pay 
the given tax, or the beneficiary of the tax. The following terms are used in the domain of taxation 
either as a notion of tax or interchangeably.  
Rates: They represent the revenue of local authorities and can be described as levies to be paid to 
the various local authority organs of the state when a public service is required by a citizen, or in 
general, to help provide revenue for any decentralised organ of the state.  
Duties: They are similar to a tax in that their payment confers the right to use a public service.  
Contributions: These are levies imposed on the population to help the state in the provision of 
social services or social insurance understandings. Examples are levies made for the interest of the 
National Social Insurance Fund, to the Local Council Support Fund, to the Housing Loan Fund or 
the National Employment Fund.  
Tariffs: They represent the ranges of duties on imports and other home-made products.  
Apart from these terms used as taxes, it is equally important to master the following terms 
commonly used in the domain of taxation:  
The tax bearer: The tax bearer is that natural or artificial person subject to the domain of 
application of an obligatory payment and who bears the burden of the said payment.  

=== PAGE 2 ===
2 
TAXATION 1 
The taxpayer: The taxpayer on the other side is that natural or artificial person who has carried 
out an operation which generates taxes. There are two classes of taxpayers: the legal taxpayer and 
the actual taxpayer.  
- The legal taxpayer is the person (natural or artificial) who is responsible for the payment of the 
tax to the fiscal administration.  
- The actual taxpayer is the tax bearer, which is the person who bears the burden of the tax.  
Tax base (tax ass essment base): This is the specific aspect or domain on which a tax is levied, 
for instance an individual’s income for income tax, the profits of companies for corporation tax, 
the estate of a deceased person for inheritance tax, or the value of a landed p roperty for land tax. 
In simple terms, the tax base is the amount/value on which the tax rate is applied or the income 
bracket for the tax.  
Tax returns: These are forms used by taxpayers to make periodic tax declarations and payments.  
Tax-deductible: This is an amount that can be deducted from income or profits in order to obtain 
the final amount of income or profit that is subject to tax.  
Tax allowance: This is a deduction made in calculating the taxable income. It reduces the tax base 
and serves as a tax benefit.  
Taxable income: This is the income liable to taxation. It is calculated by deducting income tax 
allowances and tax-deductible expenses from the taxpayer’s gross income.  
Tax bracket: These are figures between which incomes or amounts are subjected to a specific rate 
of tax. For instance, income between 1 and 2 000 000 CFAF is tax at 10%, between 2 000 001 and 
3 000 000 CFAF at 15%, etc.  
A tax a dvantage: This is a benefit enjoyed by a taxpayer as a result of a reduction in a charge to 
taxation.  
Tax rebate: This is a repayment of a tax already paid by a taxpayer. It is like a refund on taxes 
earlier paid by the taxpayer. In order to obtain a tax rebate, the taxpayer has to make a repayment 
claim to the Inspector of Taxes and the refund due to the taxpayer will be made by the Collector 
of Taxes following the Inspector’s instructions.  
Tax exempt: This represents an item (payment, income, revenue, a llowance, etc) which is not 
subject to taxation. That is, a tax-free item.  
A tax heaven: This is a state, country or territory where certain taxes are levied at a low rate or 
not at all. It also refers to countries which have a system of financial secrecy in place. It is an area 
identified as having a composite tax structure deliberately established to take advantage of, and 
exploit a worldwide demand for opportunities to engage in tax avoidance.  
Tax avoidance: This is a legal usage of the tax regime in a given country to one’s own advantage 
to reduce the amount of tax that is payable by means within the law.  
Tax sheltering: This is a legal method of minimising or decreasing an investor’s taxable income 
and, therefore, his or her tax liability. Tax shelte rs can range from investments or investment 
accounts that provide favourable tax treatment, to activities or transactions that lower taxable 

=== PAGE 3 ===
3 
TAXATION 1 
income. It is very similar to tax avoidance, although unlike tax avoidance, it is not necessarily 
legal.  
Tax evasi on: is the illegal evasion of taxes by individuals, corporations and trusts. This entails 
taxpayers deliberately misrepresenting the true state of their affairs to the tax authorities in order 
to reduce their tax liability and includes dishonest tax report ing, such as declaring less income, 
profits or gains than the amount actually earned, or overstating deductions. It is commonly 
associated with the informal sector.  
Tax liability: This is the total amount of tax that an entity or individual is legally obligated to pay 
to an authority as a result of the occurrence of a taxable event. This is obtained by applying the 
appropriate tax rate on the tax base.  
Taxable event: This is any event or transaction that results in a tax consequence or tax liability 
for the party who executes the event. Common examples of taxable events for investors include 
the receiving of dividends and interests, selling securities for a gain and exercising options.  
 
3) FUNCTIONS OF TAXES  
The functions of taxes can be perceived from two points of view:  
- The fiscal function;  
- The instrumental function.  
 
3.1) The fiscal function of taxes  
This function refers to “how the government spends taxes ”. In a state, country or community, the 
citizens or members of that community require a certain number of needs. Individually, these 
people cannot succeed in acquiring all the resources needed to satisfy these needs. Collectively, 
these people can use their collective efforts through the coordinati on of the state to acquire 
resources which can satisfy these needs. Therefore, the execution of duties of collective interest 
falls in the hands of the state. 
3.2) The instrumental function of taxes  
In addition to using taxation to raise money (which is the main function or purpose of taxation), a 
government uses taxes as an excellent means of intervention in the economy or the society. A 
government may raise or levy taxes to achieve social and economic objectives, or to achieve 
political popularity with certain groups. Taxation can redistribute a society’s wealth by imposing 
a heavier tax burden on one group in order to fund services for another. Also, some economists 
consider taxation as an important tool for maintaining the stability of a country’s economy. 
4) TYPES OF TAXATION SYSTEMS  
Tax systems are the means by which taxes are raised and collected in accordance with the tax 
legislation. Taxes can be levied following one of the following systems:  
- the proportional tax system;  
- the progressive tax system;  

=== PAGE 4 ===
4 
TAXATION 1 
- the regressive tax system;  
- the ad valorem or percentage tax system;  
- the per capita tax system;  
- The specific or unit tax system.  
 
4.1) The proportional tax system  
A proportional tax imposes the same percentage of taxat ion on everyone, regardless of income. 
The amount of the tax to be paid is obtained by applying a fixed rate of tax on the assessment base 
of the tax. The tax rate remains constant whatever the amount of the assessment base.  
For instance, if the tax rate is 10% on the monthly income, a person earning 100 000 CFAF is 
required to pay 10 000 CFAF as tax; while another person who earns 250 000 CFAF also pays 
10% of it, that is 25 000 CFAF; every income earner pays 10% of his income.  
Though favoured by the economist, Adam Smith, a proportional system of taxation is nowadays 
regarded as being less equitable than a progressive system.  
4.2) The progressive tax system  
The progressive tax imposes a higher percentage rate of taxation on those with higher incomes. It 
is a system where the rate of taxation increases as income increases, so that a person with an 
income of 100 000 CFAF may pays 11 000 CFAF in income tax (that is, 11% of his income) 
whereas a person with an income of 500 000 CFAF may pay 13 50 0 CFAF in tax (27% of his 
income). This is the principle of pay as you earn (PAYE).  
Where great inequality of income exists, a progressive system of taxation is regarded as being 
more equitable than a proportional system. The personal income tax in Camero on is an example 
of a progressive tax.  
4.3) The regressive tax system  
The regressive tax system imposes a higher percentage rate of taxation on low incomes than on 
high incomes. Some economists consider sales taxes regressive because individuals with hig her 
incomes spend a smaller proportion of their incomes on sales taxes than those with lower incomes. 
A poor person and a rich person who spend the same amount on groceries each year will pay the 
same amount in sales taxes, even though the rich person earns more money. However, rich people 
consume more than poor people.  
4.4) The ad valorem or percentage tax system  
Here, the amount of tax paid depends on the value of the commodity e.g. 10 % of the value of the 
good may be paid as taxes.  
4.5) The per capita tax system  
Here, the tax is levied per head. That is, every tax subject pays the same amount as tax, regardless 
of social or income earning capacity.  
4.6) The specific tax system  

=== PAGE 5 ===
5 
TAXATION 1 
The amount of tax paid depends on the quantity of the good bought. A spe cific tax on wine is on 
the quantity of wine rather than on its price. A bottle of expensive wine then bears the same cost 
as a bottle of cheap wine.  
5) THE PRINCIPLES OR CANONS OF TAXATION  
Canons of taxation describe the basic principles to be followed by governments and local 
authorities in formulating their taxation policies so as to optimize their tax systems. This is based 
on the ideal of harvesting as much as possible from taxes, while minimising the effects of taxes on 
individuals and activities.  
According to the economist, Adams Smith , governments have to observe four basic principles 
when formulating taxation policies: 
 Equality;  
 Certainty ;  
 Convenience; and  
 Economy.  
5.1) Equality  
According to this principle, the subjects of every state ought to contribute towards the support of 
the government as nearly as possible, in proportion to their respective abilities. That is, in 
proportion to the revenue that they respectively enjoy under the protection of that state. There are 
three ways of collecting taxes from individuals so that it falls equally on individuals. These are:  
The per capita tax system: Here, everyone pays the same contribution, say 5 000 CFAF per head, 
as in the example of the poll tax.  
The proportional tax system: Here, everyone pays the same proportion of their income in the 
tax, say 10%. This was Adams Smith’s "equal" tax.  
The progressive tax system: Here, the amount of tax is adjusted to fall most heavily on the rich.  
 
Of these three systems of tax, the per capita may be said to be fair, the proportional may be said 
to be unjust, while the progressive taxation system is the fairest system for taxes. This system has 
therefore been adopted by most nations.  
5.2) Certainty  
According to this principle, the tax which each individual is bound to pay ought to be certain and 
not arbitrary. The time of payment, the manner of payment, the quantity to be paid, ought all to be 
clear and plain. A system of tax collecti on which is not certain will almost invariably cause 
discontent.  
5.3) Convenience  
According to this principle, every tax ought to be levied at the time, or in the manner, in which it 
is most likely to be convenient for the contributor to pay it. This rule also helps the government to 
maintain as far as possible the flow of revenue at the same pace as that of expenditure. Again, 

=== PAGE 6 ===
6 
TAXATION 1 
taxes are invariably a burden at the time of payment, even when the taxpayer agrees that they are 
just and equitable. Their collection at the most convenient point reduces losses by non -payment 
and simplifies the whole process.  
5.4) Economy  
According to this principle, every tax ought to be so contrived (or designed) as both to take out 
and keep out of the pockets of people as lit tle as possible over and above what it brings in to the 
public treasury of the state. This canon, in the narrow sense of the term, requires that as little as 
possible, consistent with efficiency, should be spent on administration and collection. Or, in other 
words, the yield should be greater than the cost of collection, as any tax which costs more than it 
raises in revenue is clearly a waste of time.  
6) THE CLASSIFICATION OF TAXES  
Taxes might be levied on income, on capital or on expenditure. Taxes are c lassified either on the 
basis of the tax base or the manner in which the tax is paid to the state.  
6.1) Classification of taxes based on the tax base  
On the basis of the tax base, taxes fall within the following categories:  
i) Taxes on income: The tax base here is the income or profits of the taxpayer. For example the 
personal income tax, capital gains tax and corporation tax.  
ii) Taxes on capital: The tax base in this case is the value of an item or wealth in general. As 
examples we have the Capital transfer tax, inheritance tax, tax on capital of companies.  
iii) Taxes on expenditures: The tax base for this type of taxes is the value of the expenditure, 
which is generally represented by the net financial value of the item. Examples are the Value 
Added Tax and excise duties.  
iv) Taxes on activity: The tax base here is a particular activity and the tax is paid on the basis of 
the simple fact that this activity is carried out by the taxpayer. Examples are business licence, 
liquor licence, and the global tax paid by small business units.  
v) Taxes on property: The tax base here is the value of an asset controlled by the taxpayer. 
Examples are real estate taxes.  
6.2) Classification of taxes based on the manner of payment  
The above categories of taxes fall under two classes of taxes as per the manner of their payment 
to the state: direct and indirect taxes  
 Direct Taxes: These taxes are paid directly to the taxation authority by the person against 
whom the taxes are levied. That is the taxpayer is the tax bearer. They include taxes on 
income, on activity and on capital.  
 Indirect taxes: Here, the person against whom the ta x is levied does not directly pay the 
tax to the tax authority. That is, the taxpayer is different from the tax bearer. They in most 
cases are taxes on expenditures.  

=== PAGE 7 ===
7 
TAXATION 1 
 
7. THE EFFECTS OF TAXATION  
Economists have devoted considerable effort to study how tax es affect people’s behaviour, 
including their choices in working, saving, and investing. To understand the effect of any tax, one 
must first determine who bears the burden of the tax . The way a tax affects people is called the tax 
incidence.  
 The effect of taxes on labour supply  
Taxes can affect labour supply by influencing people's decisions about whether to work and how 
much to work.  
 The effect of taxes on saving  
Saving is the portion of income that is not spent. Might taxes levied on returns to saving (such as 
interest and dividends) influence the amount people save? When a tax is levied on interest or 
dividends, it reduces the reward for saving. This tends to reduce the amount of saving that an 
individual does.  
 The effect of taxes on physical investment  
 
In effect, a tax on business income is a tax on the physical investment’s return: the tax reduces the 
firm’s income and thus the benefit from making the investment. Most economists believe that 
business taxes decrease the amount of physical investment by businesses.  
 The effect of taxes on the standard of living  
When taxes are levied on necessaries of life, there is a danger that they should cause hardship to 
those with low income, and depress the standards of living of workers who are not or near th e 
minimum necessary for full efficiency. 