
=== PAGE 1 ===
CHAPTER TWO 
THE CAMEROON TAXATION ENVIRONMENT 
 1) TAXPAYERS ASSESSMENT SYSTEMS IN CAMEROON  
The taxes to be paid by a taxpayer depend on the taxation system or regime. According to section 
93 of the GTC , there are three tax assessment systems in Cameroon on the basis of the turnover 
realised by the business:  
- The Global Tax system;  
- The Simplified taxation system;  
- The Actual Earnings (or Real) taxation system.  
 
 1.1) The Global Tax (or flat rate taxation) System  
This is for natural persons or sole proprietors whose annual turnover is less than 10 000 000 CFAF, 
except for forestry exploiters or logging companies and persons of the liberal professions. The tax 
payable is called Global Tax. It is paid quarterly to the council of the locality of the business.  
According to section C46 of the GTC , each council shall classify activities into categories and tax 
them based on the following tax brackets:  
Category A: From 0 to 20 000 CFAF.  
Category B: From 20 001 to 40 000 CFAF.  
Category C: From 40 001 to 50 000 CFAF.  
Category D: From 50 001 to 100 000 CFAF.  
Activities are assessed under the global tax on the basis of the annual turnover of the sole trader 
and categorised as follows: 
 
 Category A shall comprise: producers, service providers and traders with an annual 
turnover lower than 2 500 000 CFAF;  
 Category B shall comprise: producers, service providers and traders with an annual 
turnover between 2 500 000 CFAF and 5 000 000 CFAF;  
 Category C shall comprise: producers, service providers and traders with an annual 
turnover between 5 000 000 CFAF and 7 500 000 CFAF;  
 Category D shall comprise:  
- Producers, service providers and sole traders with an annual turnover between 7 500 000 CFAF 
and 10 000 000 CFAF;  
- For operators of games of chance and entertainment: operators of less than 10 baby foot 
machines, operators of less than 5 pinball and video games machines, operators of less than 3 slot 
cash machines.  
According to section C 47 (2) of the GTC, hawkers who show proof of payment of the Global Tax 
to the council of his place of residence shall not be taxable in other council areas for the same 
activity.  

=== PAGE 2 ===
Based on the Presidential ordinance of July 7th 2014 reducing certain taxes paid by transporters, 
as a means of regulating the inflationary effect of transport fare due to the increase in fuel prices, 
the rates of the global tax for transporters were reduced as follows:  
Cat A: 0 to 10 000 CFAF  
Cat B: 10 0001 to 20 000 CFAF  
Cat C: 20 0001 to 25 000 CFAF  
Cat D: 25 0001 to 50 000 CFAF 
Councils are allowed, within each category, to apply specific rates to each activity. The global tax 
is paid per council, per establishment and per activity. The payment of the global tax excludes the 
payment of the business license, the personal or company income tax and the value added tax.  
According to section C46 (3) of the GTC , when it is not possible to determine the annual turnover 
of the sole proprietor, activities liable to the Global Tax shall be classify by their nature and not 
on the basis of the annual turnover. 
1.2) The Simplified Taxation System 
According to section 93 (c) (2) of the GTC, this is for natural and artificial persons with an annual 
turnover of at least 10 000 000 and less than 50 000 000 CFAF, except for passenger transporters 
and operators of games of chance and entertainment. 
There are two types of taxes in the system, depending on the legal status of the taxpayer: the 
Personal Income Tax and the Corporation or Company Tax. 
1.2.1) The Personal Income Tax (PIT)  
This is the income tax payable by natural persons and sole proprietors on salaries and related 
remunerations for workers, profits from industrial, agricultural, commercial and non -commercial 
activities and revenues from securities. Sections 69 and 70 of the GTC brings out five different 
types of Personal Income Taxes, depending on the type of income as follows:  
 For earnings of workers, this tax is calculated at the end of each accounting period by 
applying the following rates on the net taxable earnings:  
 - from 0 to 2 000 000 CFAF: 10% 
 - from 2 000 001 to 3 000 000 CFAF: 15% 
 - from 3 000 001 to 5 000 000 CFAF: 25% 
 - more than 5 000 000 CFAF: 35% 
 For taxable profits from industrial, commercial, agricultural and non -commercial 
activities, the tax shall be 30% of the net taxable profit. This taxable profit is the gross 
surplus of revenues over the expenses required for operations as determined by the  
simplified accounting system.  
 For revenues from real estates, the tax shall be 30% of the net taxable revenue.  
 For revenues from securities, the tax shall be at a flat rate of 15% of the net taxable 
revenue.  
 For non-commercial revenues and profits, the tax shall be 10% of the net taxable revenue.  

=== PAGE 3 ===
NB: The above-mentioned rates shall be increased by 10% representing the additional council 
tax rate.  
The personal income tax is paid by persons assessed under the simplified taxation system as 
follows:  
e taxpayer makes a payment of 5.5% (5% as principal rate and additional council rate at 10% 
of principal rate) of the turnover of each month not later than the 15th of the following month.  
80 and 74 of the GTC , the down payments made during the financial year 
shall be deducted from the annual tax liability and the balance shall be paid in a single installment 
not later than the 15th of March of the following year.  
section 69 of the GTC, the amount of the annual tax cannot be less than the fiscal 
minimum tax which is equal to 5.5% (5% + 10% of 5% as additional council tax rate).  
 
1.2.2) The Corporation or Company Tax (C.T)  
This is the income tax payable by artificial persons. According to section 17of the GTC , this tax is 
calculated at the end of each accounting period by applying a rate of 33% on the taxable profit of 
the year rounded down to the nearest thousand CFAF. The 33% represents 30% as principal rate 
plus 10% of principal rate as additional council tax rate.  
According to section 21 of the GTC , the company tax is paid by persons assessed under the 
simplified taxation system as follows:  
- The taxpayer makes a payment of 5.5% of the turnover for the month not later than the 15th of 
the next month.  
- According to section 22 (1) of the GTC , the down payments made during the financial year shall 
be deducted from the annual tax liability and the balance shall be paid spontaneously in a single 
payment not later than the 15th of March of the following year.  
 
Illustration 1: Determination of annual income tax liability under the simplified system  
A business realises an annual turnover of 15 650 500 CFAF.  
Required: Determine the annual income tax liability and the tax balance outstanding at year end 
under the following assumptions:  
i. The taxable profit is 6 350 600 CFAF.  
ii. The taxable profit is 2 350 600 CFAF.  
1.3) The Actual Earnings Taxation System  
This is for natural and artificial persons with an annual turnover of at least 50 000 000 CFAF. 
There are equally two types of taxes in the system, depending on the legal status of the taxpayer: 
the Personal Income Tax for natural persons or the Corporation Tax for corporate bodies.  
Section 21 of the GTC , brings in a distinctive group of tax payers known as “regulated profit 
margin sectors” . These sectors comprise of the distribution of petroleum products using pumps 
(fuel filling stations) and the distribution of (flour) mill products.  
1.3.1) The Personal Income Tax (PIT)  
It is paid by natural persons assessed under the actual system as proven by an annual turnover of 
at least 50 000 000 CFAF. The tax is computed on the taxable income of the sole propriet or or 

=== PAGE 4 ===
worker as shown above. The personal income tax is paid by persons assessed under the actual 
earnings taxation system as follows:  
- The taxpayer makes a down or cash payment of 2.2% of the turnover for the month not later than 
the 15th of the following month.  
- The down payments made during the financial year shall be deducted from the annual tax liability 
and the balance shall be declared and paid not later than the 15th of March of the following year 
(section 74 of the GTC ).  
- The annual tax liability cannot be less than the fiscal minimum tax which is equal to 2.2% of the 
yearly turnover before tax (section 69 of the GTC).  
 
However, as for taxpayers of the “regulated profit margin sectors” , the base of calculating the tax 
shall be:  
- For the dis tribution of petroleum products (fuel filling stations) and the distribution of flour mill 
products, the turnover shall be made up of the gross margin, including all types of commissions 
and allowances earned.  
- As for production enterprises of the flour mill sector, the turnover shall be the total of the 
production sold after a reduction of 50%.  
1.3.2) The Corporation or Company Tax (C.T)  
This is the income tax payable by artificial persons assessed under the actual system as proven by 
an annual turnover of at least 50 000 000 CFAF. The tax is computed on the taxable income of the 
corporate body as shown in section 1.2.2 above. The corporation tax is paid by persons assessed 
under the actual earnings taxation system as follows:  
However, section 108 and 124 of the GTC  (FL 2021) provides an incentive company tax rate as 
follows:  
 
Section 108 (new): Companies that issue stocks on the Central African Stock Exchange shall be 
entitled to a reduced company tax rate of 25%.  
Section 124b: (1) Innovative start-ups in the field of information and communication technologies, 
grouped within management structures set up as approved management centres, s hall enjoy the 
following tax advantages: 
 
a) During the incubation phase, which must not exceed 5 years: exemption from all taxes, duties, 
levies and payments with the exception of social security contributions;  
b) At the end of the incubation phase:  
i. In the event of the sale of the "start-up": application of a reduced rate of 10% on the capital 
gain on the sale;  
ii. In the event of entry into the operation phase, the company shall, for a period of five (5) years, 
benefit from:  
- application of a reduced company tax rate of 15%;  
Advances payment that can be made within the year:   
- The taxpayer makes a down or cash payment of 2.2% of the turnover for the month not later than 
the 15th of the following month; the rate shall be 1.5% companies that issue stocks on the Central 
African Stock Exchange. 

=== PAGE 5 ===
- The down payments made during the financial year shall be deducted from the annual tax liability 
and the balance shall be declared and paid not later than the 15st of March of the following year 
(section 21 of the GTC).  
- The amount of the annual tax liability cannot be less than the fiscal minimum tax which is equal 
to 2.2% of the yearly turnover before tax (section 22 of the GTC) .  
However, as for taxpayers of the “regulated profit margin sectors” , the base of calculating the tax 
shall be as indicated in 1.3.1 above. 
Illustration 2: Determination of annual income tax liability under the actual system  
A business realises an annual turnover of 65 750 750 CFAF.  
Required: Determine the annual income tax liability and the tax balance outstanding at year end 
under the following assumptions:  
i. The taxable profit is 20 340 500 CFAF.  
ii. The taxable profit is 2 350 600 CFAF.  
2) THE IDENTIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS IN CAMEROON  
According to section L1 of the GTC , every natural or artificial person subject to the payment of a 
tax has to be obligatorily registered beforehand. These persons in their capacity of legal taxpayers 
are obliged to send in an application to the competent taxation service of their locality wi thin a 
period of 15 days as from the date of commencement of activity. This application has to be 
accompanied by a location plan of the business.  
According to Decree No. 95/538/PM of September 1, 1995, fixing the modalities of registration of 
taxpayers, the following persons are subject to be registered as taxpayers:  
Cameroon.  
es in 
Cameroon either on temporary or permanent basis.  
 
2.1) Registration Requirements and Procedures  
The registration of taxpayers is subject to the presentation of a file which carries the following 
documents:  
taxpayer. This form carries the following information:  
 
 
  
 
 r where need be, those of its 
warehouse, branches or shops.  
 
  
from the registry of commerce for artificial persons.  
The procedure then is as follows:  
Centre, Divisional Tax Centre or Specialised Tax Centre).  
 

=== PAGE 6 ===
file is given a temporary registration number by the competent taxation service and 
forwarded to the central service of the taxation department.  
department and sent back to the taxation service of the taxpayer’s locality (or by delegation of 
powers by taxation service of the taxpayer’s locality).  
2.2) Taxpayer’s identification number  
There are two basic forms of taxpayer’s identification numbers, depending on whether the person 
is a natural or an artificial person. The person having the identification number can be easily 
identified by the first letter of the number as follows:  
 
  
 
 moral (or artificial) persons.  
The formats for the attribution of the numbers are as follows:  
i) For Natural (Physical) Persons  
 The number starts with the letter P.  
 The letter P is then followed by the month of birth of the proprietor.  
 The month of birth is followed by the year of birth of the proprietor.  
 The year of birth is followed by the taxpayer’s chronological number of eight (8) digits.  
 The identification number finally ends with a letter which represents the taxpayer’s index ke y.  
 
ii) For Artificial (Moral) Persons  
 The number starts with the letter M.  
 The letter M is then followed by the month of creation of the business.  
 The month of creation is followed by the year of creation of the business.  
 The year of creation of the business is followed by the taxpayer’s chronological number of 
eight (8) digits.  
 The identification number finally ends with a letter which represents the taxpayer’s index key.  
3) THE CAMEROON FISCAL ADMINISTRATION  
The taxation policy of Cameroon and the fiscal administration of taxes are carried out by the 
Ministry of Finance through its specific departments of taxes, customs and treasury. This ministry 
conceives, proposes, regulates and applies fiscal measures to be used in the Cameroon territory.  
The department of taxes with headquarters in Yaoundé and headed by a Director General is 
charged with the conception, implementation and coordination of taxation policies and fiscal 
measures related to the General Tax Code and other specific tax codes and laws . Its activities are 
controlled by Regional Tax Centers at the levels of the Regions, divisional tax centers at the levels 
of Divisions, and special tax centres at the levels of subdivisions and districts.  
The department of customs with headquarters in Yaoundé and equally headed by a Director 
General is charged with the conception, implementation and coordination of fiscal measures 
related to the Customs Code. Its activities are controlled by the various custom units in the country.  
The treasury department with headquarters in Yaoundé and also headed by a Director General is 
charged with the collection of various tax revenues on behalf of the state.  

=== PAGE 7 ===
As for the control and management of taxpayers, the fiscal law has provided specific structures at 
both the national (Yaoundé) and regional levels depending on the sizes of taxpayers. These 
structures are:  
 Specialised Management Units,  
 Approved Management Centres,  
 Regional, Divisional and Specialised tax centres.  
3.1) Specialised Management Units (SMUs)  
These units are charged with the control and management of major and medium-sized enterprises. 
The Cameroon GTC in its section 113 defines these enterprises as follows:  
 Major Enterprises are those which realise an annual turnover of at least one billion CFAF.  
 Medium - Sized Enterprises are those which realise an annual turnover of less than one 
billion CFAF.  
Two Specialised Management Units have been put in place by the fiscal law as follows:  
i) The Department of Major Enterprises (DME) or Large Taxpayers’ Unit (LTU): Based in 
Yaoundé, this structure is in charge of managing taxpayers who are classified as major enterprises. 
As such all major enterprises declare and pay their taxes directly to this department in Yaoundé, 
whatever their headquarters or region of operation.  
ii) The Medium-sized Tax Offices (MTO) or Tax Centre for Medium Enterprises (TCME) : 
These tax centres or tax offices are in charge of controlling and managing taxpayers who are 
classified as medium-sized enterprises. Formally based only in Yaoundé and Douala, these tax 
offices or tax centres have been extended to other major towns of the country such as Limbe, 
Bamenda, and Bafoussam, based on a Finance Ministerial order No. 00000/402/MINFI of 
December 17th 2013 to review the organisation of MTO. This review segmented the MTO into a 
front office unit and a back office unit and broadened the portfolio of MTOs to include all 
taxpayers who are registered for the Value Added Tax (VAT).  
3.2) Approved Management Centres (AMCs)  
According to section 118 of the GTC, these are specific centres set out to assist their members in 
the accomplishment of their fiscal obligations and to provide certain fiscal benefits to these 
members. There is no obligation for an enterprise to register as a member of this centre. The only 
legal restriction is that a business should be realising an annual turnover of at most 100 million 
CFAF to be eligible for membership, whatever the taxation system of the business. 
 
3.3) The Regional, Divisional and Specialised tax centres  
Apart from the specialised units for the management of major and medium -sized enterprises, 
small-sized enterprises are controlled at the level of the regions, specifically their areas of 
operations or headquarters by regional tax centres, divisional tax centres and specialised tax 
centres. at the levels of sub-divisions and any specialised defined area of jurisdiction as defined by 
the fiscal law. The organisation of the Divisional Tax Centres was reviewed by Finance Ministerial 
order No. 00000313/MINFI of June24th 2014. 