CHAPTER 2: THE VALUE ADDED TAX 
The Value Added Tax (VAT) is an indirect tax on consumption instituted in Cameroon by the 1998/1999 financial law and it started to be implemented on 1st January 1999 in place of turnover tax with main objective of simplifying the Cameroon taxation system. VAT is not collected by the state from the final consumer but at each stage of the economic process 
REGISTERED TRADERS OR BUSINESSES FOR VAT
Registered traders or businesses for VAT consists of natural persons or corporate bodies including regional and local authorities and bodies governed by public law, which generally or occasionally and in an independent way carry out taxable transactions.
TAXABLE TRANSACTIONS 
VAT is concerned with economic transactions carried out in Cameroon against payment and relating to production, importation, services rendered and distribution including extractive,   agricultural, food processing, timber industry or forestry plantation activities, and those of members of professions (lawyers, chartered accountants or certified public accountants, auditors, medical doctors, nurses, midwife, physiotherapists, veterinary surgeon, artists, painters, consulting engineers, architects, land surveyors, software designers) following the example of:
Sales or deliveries of goods or output and supplies to oneself
Provisions of services to third parties and services rendered to oneself (transport invoiced, commissions, repairs, maintenance, bank charges, advertising, renting, etc.)
Importation of goods
Real estate works
Real estate transactions carried out by professionals or real estate developers or agents 
Sales of second-hand articles or materials by professionals or real estate 
The disposal of some tangible fixed assets
Games of chance and games of entertainment
Sales of petroleum products whether imported or produced in Cameroun
Transactions carried out by enterprises approved under the free zone regime.
TRANSACTIONS EXEMPT FROM VAT
The following transactions are exempt from VAT because of the law, their nature and the type of taxpayer or their subjection to other taxes:
Personnel expenses
Transactions liable to other taxes such as sales of products from extractive activities, real estate transactions carried out by non-professionals, interest on external loans, interest on deposits made to finance company or financial institutions by the non-professionals and transfer of ownership over real estate or business assets subject to stamp duties;
Some international traffic transactions following the example of ships or boats used for assistance, maintenance and refueling, and, industrial and commercial activities in the high seas
Importation or sale by the state of fiscal stamps, postage stamps and, stamped papers;
Sums paid by the department in charge of public finance to the Central Bank and income from Central Bank transactions in connection with the issue of notes
School fees and accommodation charges paid to schools or university institutions duly authorized 
Household monthly consumption of electricity lower than 220 Kw/H and water lower than 20 m³
Pharmaceutical products, their inputs as well as equipment designed for pharmaceutical industries
Purchase of specialized agricultural equipment under a leasing agreement 
Transactions related to typesetting, printing, importation and sales of newspapers and periodicals; however, inputs, capital goods and  proceeds from advertising are liable to VAT
Test, consultations, health care, hospitalization, medical and biological test and the provision of prosthesis in health facilities;
Life and health contracts and commissions;
Equipment used for the fight against HIV/AIDS under conditions laid down by regulations;
Subject to reciprocity, agreement or quotas laid down by the competent authorities, all goods and services destined for the official use of foreign diplomatic, consular missions and international organizations;
Essential goods like milk, eggs, wheat, rice, pharmaceutical products, insulin, antibiotics, X-ray plates and film, fertilizers, insecticides, fungicides, herbicides, disinfectants, school books, other books and brochures, fowls, fish, preparation for infant use, oil-cake of soya bean, etc.
Sales of oil products for refueling the aircraft of companies with registered office in Cameroon 
Transactions consisting of  processing wood into intermediate or finished products notably the sawing, the modeling and the assembly
Purchases of equipment designed for solar and wind energy 
TERRITORIALITY OF VAT
Value Added Tax is concerned with any taxable transactions when the consumer or the beneficiary is found in Cameroon whatever the residence or the head office of the real taxpayer except for:
Inter-transport within the CEMAC region where the transporter or his head office should be located in Cameroon 
Commissions received for sales of tickets where the agents representing transporters should be located in Cameroon 
When the head office or the main establishment of the real taxpayer is located out of Cameroon, he should be bound to appoint a solvent representative accredited to the tax authority. In case of failure to appoint a representative, VAT and, where applicable, the attendant penalties, shall be borne by the client on behalf of the taxpayer having no fixed or permanent professional establishment in Cameroon.
ASSESSMENT TAXATION SYSTEM
Registered traders or businesses for VAT are those assessed on the basis of actual earning taxation system notably: 
natural persons and corporate bodies with annual turnover higher than fifty millions (50,000,000) FCFA
intercity road passenger transport operators using buses or minibuses with less than 50 (fifty) seats running more than five vehicles
road passenger transport operators using buses with at least 50 (fifty) seats irrespective of the number of vehicles
operators of baby-foot having more than 25 machines
operators of pin-ball and video games having more than 15 machines
operators of slot machines having more than 10 machines
Simplified taxation system is concerned with natural persons whose annual turnover ranging from fifty million (50,000,000) FCFA and one hundred million (100,000,000) FCFA, exclusive of taxes;
NB: two other taxation systems are available with the sole intention or aim of satisfying a desire for justice and respecting the OHADA accounting system; there are:
simplified taxation system (  (natural persons and corporate bodies with annual turnover less than fifty millions (50,000,000) FCFA and higher than ten millions (10,000,000) FCFA, intercity road passenger transport operators using buses or minibuses with less than 50 (fifty) seats running not more than five vehicles, operators of baby-foot having between 10 and 25 machines, operators of pin-ball and video games having between 5 and 15 machines and operators of slot machines having between 3 and 10 machines).
discharge or global tax system ( natural persons with annual turnover lower than ten millions (10,000,000) FCFA, exclusive of taxes except for timber industry or forestry plantation activities, public office-holder whose statements are deemed authentic and members of professions (lawyers, chartered accountants or certified public accountants, auditors, medical doctors, nurses, midwife, physiotherapists, veterinary surgeon, artists, painters, consulting engineers, architects, land surveyors, software designers)
ACTS CONSTITUTING LIABILITY
The following shall constitute liability (tax starting point or acts or events satisfying all the legal conditions for the payability of the tax) to VAT:
The delivery or supply of assets and goods in case of sale, exchange and custom works;
The performance of services and works or part of services and work in case of services or construction works;
The introduction of goods or assets into the national territory in case of imports
The exchange or transfer of ownership for real estate transactions carried out by professionals or real estate agents;
The payment of the price in the case of other taxable transactions
Transfer, usufruct or entry into usufruct, for leases of non-developed land or bare premises carried out by real estate developers; 
Notwithstanding the provisions above, first use, in case of supplies to oneself and debts for building contractors who expressly opt for this system;
LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT
The following shall constitute liability for payment (right that may be exercised by the taxation services to claim payment from the taxpayer at a given time) to VAT:
The delivery or supply or invoicing date of goods or assets;
The payment of price, deposit and advances for the provision of services and real estate works;
The registration date of the statement of home use entry for importation;
The date of conveyance or transfer for real estate transactions carried out by professionals or real estate agents
The date when the interest or leases fall due.
NB: Any VAT invoiced shall be due for payment.
SUMMARY TABLE
BASIS OF ASSESSMENT
The basis of assessment (rounded down to the nearest thousand francs) of VAT shall be as follows:
For the supply of goods or assets, all sums or valuable, all profits, goods or services received or to be received in return for the supply of goods; the cost price of processed goods or the purchase price, exclusive of taxes, of goods bought and used for the supplies to oneself;
For the provision of services, the value of materials consumed, all sums and benefits received  
For the exchange of goods or assets, the value of the products received in return for the payment for the goods plus, where applicable, the value of the additional payment
For the import, the amount of the customs duty, excise duties and the taxable value as defined by CEMAC customs code. For goods entering the territory of a member state, the basis of assessment shall be the ex-works value, excluding forwarding costs.
For games of chance and games of entertainment, the proceeds of such games after 40% of reduction or allowance 
For construction works, the amount appearing in the contract, bill or invoice
For supplies to oneself, the price, exclusive of taxes, of goods bought and used 
For public contracts financed from State budget or through loans or subsidies of any origin whatsoever and contracts relating to public establishments of an industrial and commercial or administrative, cultural or scientific nature; mixed-controlled enterprises, councils and public bodies with or without a legal personality and financial autonomy, the contract amount inclusive of taxes, excluding VAT and excise duty
The following shall be included in the basis of assessment of VAT:
Additional expenses resulting from the supply of goods or assets and invoiced to customers
Miscellaneous additional expenses included in the price and paid by the buyer or customer
Taxes, duties and impost excluding VAT
The sums collected by the taxpayer as deposit on unidentifiable, returnable and reusable packaging; where, on expiry of the time lapse observed in the trade, such packaging is not returned, VAT shall be claimed on the basis of its selling price.
The following shall be excluded from the basis of assessment of VAT:
Trade discount and cash discount appearing on an initial or rectified invoice
Free distribution of goods or assets for advertising or sales promotion
Refunding or reimbursement of disbursements or expenses paid on behalf of a third party
Lateness interest and compensation resulting from agreement
Deposit on identifiable , returnable and reusable packaging  
Incidence of Custom Duty and Excise Duty on VAT Assessment Base
i)- Case of importation out of the CEMAC Zone (S. 138 GTC)
VAT base = value CIF + Custom Duty + Excise Duty 
ii)- Case of importation from the CEMAC Zone
VAT base = Factory Value + Excise Duty
CIF stands for: Cost, Insurance and Freight
CIF = purchase price + insurance + freight + accessory expenses
Custom Duty is a tax on both importation and exportation of goods.
NB: Exportation in Cameroon is exonerated from VAT, but for the case of unprocessed wood.
Custom Duty = Value CIF x Custom Duty Rate
 EXCISE DUTY
(a) Definition
This is a tax applied on the value of certain products considered to be luxurious, harmful or noxious. Example may include: tobacco, precious metals, jewelries, wines and other fermented drinks, etc…
It is an example of an Ad-Valorem or Percentage Tax (i.e. tax paid per value of item) 
(b) Products subject to excise duty:For a full list of items liable to Excise Duty, see Section 131 of the GTC and make reference to Annex II of the GTC; the most prominent among them are:
Malt beer
Cigarettes, cigarillos and cigars;
Wines and other fermented drinks;
Precious jewelries and metals;
Mobile telephone communication and internet services;
Vehicles;
Cash machines and other apparatus used in operating games of chance and entertainment.
NB: as per Section 131a: Inputs of products subject to excise duty shall not be subject to excise duty, provided that they are purchased by local production enterprises subject to excise duty. 
(c) Base of assessment
Assessments base of Excise Duty for products imported out of the CEMAC Zone
Excise Duty = (Cost, Insurance and Freight (transport) value + Custom Duty) x rate
Assessments for importation within the CEMAC Zone
Excise Duty = production cost (factory value) or purchase price before taxes x rate
Assessments for locally manufactured products 
Excise Duty = production cost or purchase price before VAT x rate
The case of free goods distributed to customers during sales promotion
They shall be excluded from the taxable of ED to a limit of 3% of the volume of production made by the entity.
Section 141 (a): For the specific case of the beverages listed below, the basis of assessment of excise duty shall be determined after applying an abatement of:
- 25% for carbonated beverages; 
- 10% for beers with an alcohol content less than or equal to 5,5%. 
Rate of Excise Duty:
- Extra high rate………….…50% 
- High rate……………….......30% 
- General rate ……….….…. 25 %  NB: It is liable to the additional council tax at 10%
- Avarage rate ………….... 12.5% 
- Reduced or abated rate…. 5% 
- Extra reduced or abated rate……2% 
The general rate shall apply to goods and services listed in Annex II of this GTC, exclusive of those subject to the abated, reduced, and extra-abated rates. 
The average rate shall apply to: 
	- Private vehicles with a cylinder capacity ˂= 2500 cm³, aged more than 10 years and less 	than 15 years; 
	- Private vehicles with a cylinder capacity > 2500 cm³, aged more than one year and less 	than 15 years; 
	- Utility vehicles, public transport vehicles, trailers and tractors other than agricultural 	vehicles of any cylinder capacity, aged more than 15 (fifteen) years and less than 25 years; 
	- Motorcycles with a cylinder capacity of more than 250 cm³ of tariff headings 8711.30, 	8711.40 	and 8711.50; also, parts of these motorcycles.
	- hair, wigs, wools, beards, eyebrows, eyelashes, locks and other textile materials prepared 	for the manufacture of wigs or similar items.
	- Some second hand articles of tariff heading 6309.00.00.000 and used tyres of tariff 	headings 	4012.20.00.100 to 4012.20.00.900. 
	- Packages of programmes and digital audio-visual content. 
The reduced excise duty rate shall apply to:
- games of chance and games of entertainment not subject to the special tax on games of chance and games of entertainment referred to in section 206 et seq. of the GTC.
- Cocoa-free sweets of heading 1704; 
- Chocolate and other food preparations with a high cocoa content of tariff heading 1806.20 to 180690; 
- Motorcycles with a cylinder capacity less than or equal to 250 cm3; 
- Ice cream of tariff heading 2105; 
- Mayonnaise imported from subheading 2103.90 00 000. 
The extra abated rate shall apply to the tax free turnover of mobile telephone communication and internet services companies.
The extra-high rate shall apply to hydroquinone of tariff heading 29072200000 and imported cosmetic products of Chapter 33 containing hydroquinone. 
The high rate shall apply to cigars, cigarettes and other tobacco of this tarrif position; In the specific case of tobacco, the amount of excise duty arising from the application of the 25% rate referred to above may not be less than CFAF 5 000 per 1000 rods of cigarettes,
- Specific case Excise Duty on alcoholic drinks: In the specific case of alcoholic beverages, the excise duty amount will be 25% of the base; however, an additional excise duty arising from the application of the specific taxation system shall be:
75 CFAF on 65 centiliters of beer and 37.5 CFAF for all 33 liters of beer 
For locally produced wines, spirits, whiskies and champagnes; 
		2 CFAF per centiliter for spirits known as mixed liquor; 
		2 CFAF per centiliter for wines; 
		8 CFAF per centiliter for whiskies; 
		25 CFAF per centiliter for champagnes; 
For lower grades of imported wines, spirits, whiskies and champagnes: 
		3 CFAF per centiliter for spirits known as mixed liquor; 
		3 CFAF per centiliter for whines; 
CFAF per centiliter for whiskies; 
		30 CFAF per centiliter for champagnes; 
For higher grade of imported wines, spirits, whiskies and champagne: 
		6 CFAF per centiliter for spirits known as mixed liquor; 
		6 CFAF per centiliter for wines; 
		20 CFAF per centiliter for whiskies;
	60 CFAF per centiliter for champagnes;
- In the specific case of imported carbonated beverages, sodas and other nonalcoholic beverages, in addition to the excise duty referred to in Section 142 paragraph (1) (b), a specific excise duty of 2.5 CFAF per centiliter shall be applied.
- For the specific case of non-returnable packaging, a specific excise duty shall be applied according to the following tariffs:
	CFA francs 15 per unit of non-returnable packaging carrying soft drinks and alcoholic 	beverages; 
	CFA francs 5 per unit of non-returnable packaging, maximum 10% of the value of the 	product, for all other products. 
VAT ASSESSMENT BASE WHEN ACCESSORY CHARGES ARE INVOLVED
 (a) Case of accessory charges related to Containers
- VAT is collected on deposits of Non Identifiable Containers. 
- For Identifiable Containers, VAT is not collected on their deposits. 
Where on expiry of the time lapse observed in the trade agreement such containers are not returned, VAT shall be claimed on the basis of the selling price.
NB: When the packages are returned, the customer is supposed to be reimbursed. Two situations may arise:
If the reimbursement equals the deposit that was paid, then s/he is paid by the supplier via a return invoice in which case the situation of VAT is null.
If the reimbursement is less than the amount that was deposited, the difference is treated as income for rents of the container and which is taxable by VAT. 
(b) Case of accessory charges related to transportation 
The transport charges are to be supported by the buyer. Three situations arise:
- The seller does the transportation and bills the buyer. It is considered selling of services and is taxed by VAT.
- The seller hires a professional transporter, pays on behalf of the buyer the bill and in turn bills the buyer the same amount; the bill paid by the seller on behalf of the buyer is taxed by VAT but this charge is transferable to the buyer, 
- The seller hires a professional transporter, pays on behalf of the buyer the bill and in turn bills the buyer at an amount higher than the one he paid to the transporter; the surplus is considered services sold and is taxed by VAT.
The transport charges are to be supported by the seller; if an external person is hired, to transport the goods, the supplier incurs and supports the cost VAT inclusive. 
RATES
VAT rates are as follows:
General rate is concerned with all transactions not subject to the zero rate; whereas, the zero rate is concerned with exports of goods and transactions carried out by businesses located within industrial free zones and special industrial free zones.
DEDUCTIONS
VAT paid to a supplier or a third party for a taxable transaction and appearing on a bill or home use entry statement, shall be deducted or deductible the same month from the VAT received from customers or third parties. 
The deduction shall be applied until the end of the second financial year following the one in which VAT fell due and it shall concern VAT levied on:
Raw materials and other supplies used in producing goods and services;
Services which are real factors of production and provided by registered taxpayers assessed on the basis of actual earning taxation system;
Purchases of goods and assets used for business purpose;
Capital goods used for business purpose excluding private vehicles , their spare parts and their repairs;
Goods used by the concessionaire but belonging to the conceding authority
Goods or products designed for export
services provided directly at the manufacturing processing or packaging stages of exported products
Transportation and transit operations of exported products.
VAT deductions at source shall be made upon production of the payment receipt duly issued by the collector of taxes.
A taxpayer shall be liable for part of the previous deduction (amount of the deduction less one fifth for each year of use) when a fixed asset is withdrawn from the business book before the end of the fourth year from its acquisition date.
 VAT initially deducted shall be paid in full in the case of services and goods other than fixed assets used for transactions not liable to VAT.
VAT paid on sales and services subsequently rescinded, cancelled or unpaid shall be recoverable by charging it to tax due the following month after sending to customers a new invoice or a duplicate of the initial invoice.
VAT paid on the following shall not entail deductions:
Expenses for housing, lodging, catering, reception, shows and costs of hiring of private car or passenger transport vehicle incurred by the non-professionals;
Importation of goods to be used for business purpose but which are unused and re-exported in their original state;
Goods and services purchased by the enterprise but which are used by third parties, the management or employees for such enterprises;
Services in connection with goods exempted from the right of deduction 
PRO RATA OR PROPORTIONAL DEDUCTION
When a taxpayer carries out transactions not exclusively giving right to deduction, the deduction applied to fixed assets, goods and services shall be made from a pro rata or a proportional deduction or a fraction of turnover pertaining to taxable transactions calculated as follows:
Specific turnover of inter-CEMAC freight forwarding operations and related services shall appear in both the numerator and denominator.
Pro rata is applied on the theoretical initial VAT so as to calculate the real recoverable or deductible VAT; no deduction is allowed where the pro rata is below 10%.
An estimated or temporary pro rata is used within the current year until that year comes to an end on the basis of the incomes or revenues from the previous year for the existing undertakings and the forecasted incomes or revenues of the current year for the new undertakings; The final amount of the proportional deduction shall be fixed not later than 31 March each year. Any deductions already made shall consequently be regularized within the same time-limit. The estimated pro rata for existing enterprises shall be acceptable only upon presentation of the final pro rata for the previous year serving as a basis and the accounting estimates for new enterprises. Any positive or negative difference between the provisional and final proportional deduction shall be subject to an additional VAT or deduction.
Application: a company has made a turnover of 150,000,000F for 2010 of which 90,000,000F for taxable transactions and 60,000,000F for exempt transactions from VAT. The purchases made in 2010 were as follows:
Importation of a truck intended to only taxable transactions: 8,000,000F with VAT excluded
Importation of spare parts assigned 70%  for taxable transactions and 30% for exempt transactions for VAT: 4,500,000F with VAT excluded
Importation of paints assigned for exempt transactions for VAT: 600,000F with VAT excluded
Required: calculate the VAT recoverable or deductible through the pro rata method without sectors of activity
Application: resume the example above and calculate the VAT recoverable through the pro rata method with different sectors of activity
TAXPAYER’S OBLIGATIONS
Value added tax (VAT) shall be settled on the basis of the return forms supplied by the taxation authorities and submitted to the competent tax collection office of the area along with the appropriate amount to settle the taxes due within 15 days of each month following the month during which the relevant transactions were conducted by the Taxpayers.
Where, during a month, no taxable transaction has been carried out, a return shall nonetheless be filed bearing “NIL” on the “taxable transaction” line.
For suppliers to the state, the value-added tax shall be deducted at source during the settlement of bills and transferred to the tax revenue office and similar offices under the same conditions and time limits applicable to other transactions.
Taxpayers liable to the VAT must: 
be registered; 
keep accounts in compliance with the OHADA standard accounting system ; 
Taxpayers liable to VAT shall indicate on their bills, the amount exclusive of taxes of the transaction, the relevant VAT amount, as well as the total amount inclusive of all taxes of the transaction. These bills should also carry the taxpayer’s single and identification number, the business or company name and their exact address.
THE VAT PROCESS
The VAT is collected at each stage of the economic process by the taxpayer on behalf of the state. The VAT’s process is as follows:
The taxpayer collects from the customers or debtors VAT known as “ VAT invoiced” due to taxable sales and taxable performances of services ; VAT invoiced is recorded through a liability account known as “State, VAT invoiced”
The taxpayer paid to suppliers or creditors VAT known as “ VAT recoverable or deductible” due to taxable purchases of goods or fixed assets and taxable services consumed; VAT deductible or recoverable is recorded through an asset account known as “ State, VAT recoverable ”
At the end of each month, the “ VAT recoverable or deductible “ is deducted from the “ VAT invoiced “ through the VAT return form with the sole intention of calculating the VAT payable ( positive difference) or VAT credit (negative difference) 
The VAT’s process is summarized through the following table and data:
Purchases of products from extractive activities.
VAT CREDIT
Tax credits shall be chargeable to the VAT due for subsequent periods until fully paid and without any deadline. Accrued quarterly credits exceeding 10 million shall be forwarded to the Director General of Taxation for approval. They shall be carried forward to subsequent periods starting from the month following that in which they were approved. 
Approved VAT credits may be offset and possibly refunded, on condition that the taxpayer does not owe any taxes and duties.
Non-chargeable VAT credits shall, at the request of the taxpayer and on the express authorization of the Director General of Taxation, be offset by the issue of special treasury cheques valid for the payment of taxes of the same nature, as well as customs duties, on condition that the taxpayer show proof of uninterrupted activity for at least the two past years. 
Non-chargeable credit shall be refundable to:
to firms having a structural credit status due to the deduction of tax at source;
 within 3 (three) months of filing the application to industrialists and leasing establishments  having made some investments 
to exporters within a time-limit of not more than 2 (two) months from the date of deposit the application for reimbursement 
at the end of each quarter to diplomatic or consular missions, subject to a formal reciprocity agreement
at the end of the financial year, to approved non-profit making organizations where their transactions are of a social, sporting, cultural, religious, educational or philanthropic nature and consistent with their objectives.
Applications for the offsetting or refund of tax credits shall be forwarded along with a statement of the tax situation.
SANCTIONS
The following sanctions are applicable for non-respect of VAT’s obligations:
Inadequate VAT return: the inadequacies, omissions or inaccuracies affecting the tax base or data, and which have led the tax authority to make adjustments shall give rise to the application of a 1.5% of lateness interest per month up to a maximum of 50%, calculated on the basis of charges to be borne by the taxpayer as from the day following the day when the tax return bearing inadequacies, omissions or inaccuracies was deposited up to the last day of the month of notification;  in addition to the lateness interest inadequate return shall attract the following additional penalties: 30% in case of good faith, 100% in case of bad faith and 150% in case of fraud, without prejudice to the criminal proceedings 
 Failure to make a VAT return: any taxpayer whom after a notice to declare has not filed a VAT return shall be liable to arbitrary assessment and his tax shall be increased by 100%. Such increase shall be raised to 150% in case of a further offence. Lateness interest of 1.5% per month up to a maximum of 50 shall be calculated with effect from the day following that of the filing of the return up to the last day of the month of notification, each month started being considered a full month. In addition, failure to file a return giving rise to arbitrary assessment shall entail the loss of the right to deduction and to VAT credit relating to a previous period.
Failing to fill a return showing nil tax following an official warning, shall give rise to a fixed fine of 100,000 (one hundred thousand) francs. 
Failure to file within the legal time-limit an application for registration or modification of information used for initial registration, as well as any declaration or registration containing clearly erroneous information shall give rise to a fixed fine of 250,000 (two hundred and fifty thousand) francs.
Failure to indicate the taxpayer identification number: failure to indicate on an invoice, the taxpayer identification Number shall entail non-deduction of VAT shown on the invoice.
 Absence of invoice or false invoice: a fine equal to 100% of the value of the transaction with a minimum of 100,000 (one hundred thousand) francs shall be applied to any sale of goods or any provision of services not having been invoiced or for which an erroneous or incomplete invoice has been made, received or used by a professional. 
Any VAT claim obtained on the basis of false invoices shall give rise to the immediate refund of the sums unduly received, in addition to a fine equal to 100% of the value of the transaction. 
A fixed fine that may go up to 5,000,000 (five million) francs shall be applied to any person who gives false information or attempts to avoid or object to the right to information. A fine of 100,000 (one hundred thousand) francs per day of delay beyond the time-limits indicated in the application, shall be applicable to any attempt to postpone execution of the right to information. The same fine shall be applied in case of delaying tactics with intent to object to the execution of the right to information.
Failure to pay or late payment: late payment of tax shall entail application of a lateness interest of 1.5 % per month of delay. Every month begun being considered as a whole month; the same rate of interest on late payment shall be applied to any undue VAT claim received, and shall not be subject to any reduction. Regarding the specific case of spontaneous payment of tax, any late return or payment shall entail the application of a 10% penalty per month of delay, without exceeding 30% of the principal tax due. 
ACCOUNTING ENTRIES
Transactions related to VAT are recorded as follows:
VAT collected from or invoiced to a customer due to a sale or a performance of a service
VAT paid to a supplier due to a purchase or a service consumed
VAT paid to a supplier due to a transaction with VAT included
VAT payable or accrued VAT at the end of the month 
VAT credit at the end of the month 
VAT deductions at source
Customer’s book
Supplier’s book
CONCLUSION
VAT is an indirect tax on consumption borne by the final consumer
Appendix 2: VAT RETURN
RETURN FOR BUSINESS AND LIQUOR LICENCE, INCOME, TURNOVER AND SPECIFIC ACTIVITIES TAXES (extract)
TURNOVER AND INCOME TAXES
											FISCAL YEAR:……………
ASSESMENT REGIME: ACTUAL                   SIMPLIFIED   		MONTH OF:………………..
Unique Identification Number (UIN):………………………….……………………………………………………….…………………….
  Town:……………………..	Council:………………………	Quarter:………………….		Area:………………
PO Box:………………		Fixed Phone:……………………………		Cell Phone:…………………………….
Electronic Address:………………………………………………………		Fax:…………………………………………………
APPLICATION EXERCISE ON VAT 
XYZ  PLC  is a super market operating in Bamenda. The contacts are PO Box 1984. Tel 677567890. It is found in the actual earning taxation system  and was  created on the 13/03/ 2008 and registered in the mezam divisional tax centre with the number 00454514. With the key y. The following have been extracted from the general ledger of XYZ for the month of Oct:
  Process the VAT return for the month.
2. The extract below is an interview  test for the recruitment of an accountant in NGWA PLC.
Examiner:  Discuss about VAT on fixed assets.
Candidate:   
First of all amongst the four rates in place, it is the super reduced rate which is applied on    tangible fixed assets. Next  VAT on fixed assets acquired by an enterprise  cannot be completely recoverable when the asset has not been used in the business for at least seven years. If not the case, VAT will have to be adjusted.
Finally, when the difference between the temporary prorate and the real prorate is  positive , the enterprise will have a VAT credit from the state which will have to be adjusted at the end of the financial year and if otherwise, the company will be owing the stae with the adjusted balance to be paid latest the  31st march of the next year.   
Examiner:     Congratulations, you have been able to make four sentences within four minutes and committed at least 5 errors.
Candidate:  What is my score?
Required: outline 6 errors committed by the candidate and make the corrections.
3.BCAM is a joint stock company located in Bamenda and created in June 2000 with a capital of 800 000 000 F fully paid up. This company carries out taxable activities and transactions exempted from VAT.
At the end of 2014, the summary of sales made was as follows:
Sales made in the national territory: 934 920 000 F (AT);
Exportation of taxable products: 63 000 000 F (BT)
Sales exempted from VAT: 145 000 000 F (BT).
Also, purchases for 2014 amounted to 647 527 500 F (AT). A prorata of 72% was used to recover VAT though out the year.
Transactions carried out during the month of March and April 2015 were as follows:
Purchases of raw materials used for the taxable products only: 18 540 000 F (Excl. Tax) in March and 22 420 000 F (Excl. Tax) in April;
Purchases of raw materials and services used at the same time for taxable products and exempted products amounted to 14 820 000 F (Excl. Tax) in March and 12 340 000 F (Excl. Tax) in April. These purchases were 60% used for taxable products and 40% for exempted products.
All purchases are taxable to VAT. 
Sales (Excl. Tax) were as follows:
During the month of May 2015, the company bought 30000 sticks of cigarettes for 30 600 F (Before VAT and before excise duty). During the same month the company also acquired a car with an engine capacity of 3 000 cm3 at 25 000 000 F (Before VAT and before excise duty).
Work required:
Calculate the temporary pro rata for the year 2015.						/02 Marks 
Find the amount of VATto be adjusted at the end of 2014 and state its nature.		/ 01 Mark
Compute the VAT to pay to the public treasury or the VAT credit resulting from the declaration of March 2015 assuming that 
The company is organised in sectors of activity.						/ 03.5 Marks 
The company is not organised in sectors of activity, and in this case, raw materials used at the same time for taxable products and exempted products are not shared.						/ 03.5 Marks
Calculate the purchase price (After VAT and Excise duty) of the cigarettes.			/ 03 Marks 
Calculate the acquisition price (After VAT and Excise duty) of the car.			/ 02 Marks. 
4.an enterprise recorded the following details during the first 3 months of 2018.
Knowing that the VAT credit for December 2017 amounted to 75000Fcfa and that 20% of the sales of march was to central Africa, calculate the VAT due or credit for each month and record the VAT for March assuming the payment was done by cheque on the 15th april 2018.     (5mks)
5. NGU Plc  sold  the following  to FRU in November 2018
Sales of goods                                                               30 000 000
Sales of essential pharmaceutical products            20 000 000
Transport     invoiced                                                    1000 000
The goods were delivered in 100 returnable containers consigned at 5000F each .
REQUIRED:
Determine the taxable base of this operation for VAT
Determine the VAT to be paid by FRU  for the month of November  if the sales amounted to 40 000 000F  and the interim prorata is 70%
Consider the previous exercise but using a prorata of 9%
Record the  VAT for November in the books of FRU considering a prorata of 70% and  knowing that the VAT was paid by bank cheque on the 15th December  (10mks)

[TABLE 0]
Nature of transaction | Tax Point or generating act | Liability for pyt. Or Exigency
Sales of goods; | The delivery of tangible movable assets, always assimilated to the Date of Invoice; | Same like the for the tax point
Provision of services and works; | Execution of service or work, always assimilated to the Date of Invoice; | Payment of price or  advance for the provision
Importation; | Introduction of goods into the national territory as defined by the Custom Code; | Registration date of the declaration (Clearance date);
Real estate operations; | The deed of transfer of property which attest for the exchange or transfer of ownership; | Same like the for the tax point
For leases credits of non developed land or bare premises; | Transfer, usufruct or entry into usufruct; | Due date of interest or of rents
Supply for own use; | Date of first use | Same like the for the tax point;
Operations realized by financial institutions; | Payment of charges; | Date of payment;
Provision of water and electricity; | Raising of bills or Date of invoice; | Date of payment;

[TABLE 1]
Rates | principal | Additional council tax (10% of principal) | Total
General rate | 17.5% | 1.75% | 19.25%
Zero rate | 0% | 0% | 0%

[TABLE 2]
Pro rata =

[TABLE 3]
Transactions | Taxation system | Taxation system | Taxation system | Taxation system | Final consumers | Final consumers
Transactions | actual earnings | actual earnings | simplified | Global | A | B
Purchases | 1,000,000 (1) |  |  |  |  | 
VAT on purchases |  |  |  |  |  | 
Sales | 1,500,000 | 1,800,000 | 2,000,000 | 2,500,000 | 2,620,000 | /
VAT on sales |  |  |  |  |  | 
VAT payable/VAT credit |  |  |  |  |  | 
Value added |  |  |  |  |  | 

[TABLE 4]
4. /5. | 70/72/77  443. | Class 4 or class 5 account Sales/production for own use/financial/financial revenue  State, VAT invoiced on …. Debit invoice N°….. | XX | X X

[TABLE 5]
6. 445. | 4. / 5. | Class 6 account State, VAT recoverable on ……. Class 4 or class 5 account Debit invoice N°……. | X X | XX

[TABLE 6]
6. | 4. / 5. | Class 6 account Class 4 or class 5 account Debit invoice N°……. | XX | XX

[TABLE 7]
443. | 445. 4441 | State, VAT invoiced on …. State, VAT recoverable on ……. State, accrued VAT VAT return N°……. | XX | X X

[TABLE 8]
443. 4449 | 445. | State, VAT invoiced on …. State, VAT credit State, VAT recoverable on ……. VAT return N°……. | X X | XX

[TABLE 9]
4011. | 5. 445. | Suppliers  Class 5 account State, VAT recoverable on ……. | XX | X X

[TABLE 10]
443. 5. | 4111 | State, VAT invoiced on …. Class 5 account  Customers | X X | XX

[TABLE 11]
VALUE ADDED TAX (VAT)





[TABLE 12]
Headings | Amount | Observations
Purchases of Goods | 12500 000 | All purchases are taxable supplies (excl tax)
Purchases of minor equipments | 380000 | The minor equipment is taxable (tax excl)
Acquisition of fixed assets (tax excl) | 6400 000 | VAT is not to be recovered on a private car bought for 2000 000F tax excl.
Consumption of services | 822090 | Amounts tax excl
Sales of goods | 24000680 | Of these sales 2020680F were made to a customer in Nigeria,  8300 000F were liable to excise duty at the standard rate, 4250 000 at the reduced rate and 3650 000F were made to a major enterprise with the VAT withheld during payment.
Revenue from the hiring of containers and vehicles | 845800 | The revenue figures are before VAT and all are liable to VAT
VAT credit brought forward | 11 800 | 

[TABLE 13]
Heading | March | April
Sales taxable in Cameroon | 42 800 000 | 38 600 000
Sales exempted | 13 000 000 | 14 000 000
Exportation of taxable products | 8 400 000 | 15 000 000

[TABLE 14]
 | Jan | Feb | March
Sales | 8000000 | 12000000 | 9000000
Purchases | 6000000 | 13000000 | 5000000